Title: Large-Scale Assessment of Language, Speech, and Movement in Autism and ADHD with AI

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864v3.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
> PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026

# Large-Scale Assessment of Language, Speech, and Movement in Autism and ADHD with AI 

## Aimar Silvan 1, Lucas C. Parra 1,* , Alexandre R. Franco 2,Adriana Di Martino 2, Michael P. Milham 2, Jens Madsen 1

> 1Department of Biomedical Engineering, City College of New York, New York, NY, 10031, USA
> 2Child Mind Institute, New York, NY, 10022, USA
> *Corresponding author: parra@ccny.cuny.edu

## Abstract 

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) frequently co-occur with overlapping traits. We investigated whether automated behavioral analysis during a clinician-child interview can identify distinct, objective features of the two conditions. Analyzing audio-video recordings of 2,529 youths (ages 5–22) in a broad community sample, multivariate models revealed that language difficulties often attributed to ADHD are primarily explained by age, cognitive ability, or co-occurring ASD. Increased motor activity specifically marked hyperactive-impulsive ADHD, but not ASD or inattentive ADHD. ASD was uniquely characterized by divergent narrative production and idiosyncratic responses, alongside a distinct vocal profile of higher pitch and dysphonia, despite structurally intact language. While these digital behavioral measures correlate with most diagnostic categories and age, the joint analysis effectively separates the effects of ASD from ADHD. These findings show that scalable digital assessment from recorded clinical interviews can disentangle overlapping ASD and ADHD diagnoses into domain-specific behavioral signatures. 

## 1. Introduction 

Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) are both prevalent con-ditions with long-term functional impacts [1 –4]. ADHD involves persistent inattention and/or hyperactivity, while ASD is characterized by challenges with social interaction and restricted, repetitive behaviors and in-terests [5]. These heterogeneous conditions frequently co-occur [6 –12], sharing genetic factors [13 – 16] and con-verging variations in large-scale brain networks [17–22]. Current diagnostic assessments for ASD and ADHD rely on structured laboratory tasks, which can lack eco-logical validity [23 –25], or on parent and teacher reports, which can be subject to recall or rater bias [26]. Further-more, traditional observational research typically focuses on isolated behavioral domains and is constrained by small sample sizes due to the high cost and time required for manual behavioral coding. This has traditionally lim-ited research to smaller samples that do not capture the vast heterogeneity inherent in ADHD and ASD in more natural settings. Meanwhile, routine clinical visits pro-vide rich, ecologically valid opportunities to observe pa-tients’ spontaneous behaviors in a naturalistic social con-text. Here, we test whether large-scale, automated anal-ysis of naturalistic clinical interactions can disentangle overlapping ADHD and ASD diagnoses into separable behavioral dimensions. Multiple studies have looked at behavioral presenta-tions of ASD and ADHD. However, studying these con-ditions in isolation may obscure their true clinical presen-tation [27]. Disentangling overlapping ADHD and ASD traits into separable behavioral dimensions is conceptu-ally and clinically critical to better understand genetic heterogeneity [15], improve precise disorder characteri-zation [28], and ensure timely diagnosis [29]. We leveraged the Healthy Brain Network (HBN) cohort [30], a large, cross-sectional community sample of neu-rotypical and neurodivergent youth. The data included a video-recorded, semi-structured interview where par-ticipants were asked about an emotive animated film they just watched. This easily scalable interview was designed to elicit language, emotional expression, and social-cognitive interpretations. While core deficits in attention, sensory processing, and executive functioning are central to these conditions, evaluating them typically requires highly structured, con-strained cognitive tasks [31]. In contrast, during natu-ralistic social interactions, the most prominent and clini-cally observable manifestations of neurodivergence are how a child speaks, sounds, and moves. We therefore prioritized the automated assessment of three directly observable domains: motor activity, language use, and speech prosody. State-of-the-art AI enables the objec-tive, simultaneous extraction of these metrics from audio-video recordings. In the following, we review relevant literature in the context of ADHD and ASD. Effective communication depends on both structural 

1 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026

language (vocabulary, syntax) and pragmatic language skills (social application, topic coherence) [32]. Social communication deficits are a core diagnostic feature of ASD but not ADHD [5]. However, studies using informant-based assessments suggest a significant degree of overlap, with both groups demonstrating difficulties in both pragmatic and structural language [32–34]. Beyond fundamental language skills, perspective-taking is also essential for discourse and narrative com-prehension and construction [35]. This is often described as Theory of Mind (ToM), i.e., the ability to infer the mental and emotional states of others. Difficulties in perspective-taking have long been associated with ASD [36]. Studies using automated language analysis have identified repetitive speech, atypical social narratives in ASD [35,37], and narrative disorganization in ADHD [38]. However, these methods typically evaluate fewer than 50 participants [34] and analyze conditions separately, limiting generalizability and obscuring shared versus distinct traits. We address these gaps by jointly mod-eling structural, pragmatic, and higher-order semantic and narrative abilities across both diagnoses to develop a detailed model of traits in both ADHD and ASD on an unprecedented scale. Alongside communication deficits, atypical prosody is a clinical hallmark of ASD [37]. Recent systematic reviews link ASD to higher mean pitch and greater pitch variabil-ity [39], though findings regarding loudness, speech rate, and voice quality remain inconsistent due to methodolog-ical heterogeneity and small sample sizes [39, 40]. Fur-thermore, separate reports on ADHD suggest that it also presents with distinct prosodic features [41, 42]. What is currently unclear is whether this presentation is specific to ADHD, or if they result from the co-occurring ASD, or whether they interact to exacerbate the effects. Auto-mated vocal analysis shows diagnostic promise [43 –45], but it has not yet been used to determine which vocal signatures are due to the co-occurrence, or which can be uniquely attributed to either group. Motor differences are central to both ADHD and ASD, yet their behavioral signatures are rarely quantified under comparable conditions. While ASD has been associated with diverse motor patterns [46, 47], it remains unclear which of these reflect distinct motor phenotypes or are shared manifestations of ADHD. Further complicating matters, language, speech, and motor coordination develop rapidly with age, and symp-tom presentations can shift [48]. For instance, hyperac-tivity in ADHD often decreases while inattention per-sists into adolescence [49]. Without rigorously modeling key covariates like age, sex [50, 51], and cognitive ability (IQ) [52, 53], observed markers may simply reflect typical developmental or demographic variance rather than true psychopathology. This first analysis of the HBN semi-structured inter-view presents an opportunity to simultaneously observe these diverse behavioral domains at an unprecedented scale. Using clinical diagnoses, we apply a multivariate approach to identify joint drivers of behavioral variance across this cross-sectional developmental cohort. Deviat-ing from prior work that treats co-occurring ADHD and ASD as a distinct categorical group [54 – 56], we model ADHD Inattention, ADHD Hyperactivity, and ASD as ad-ditive dimensions consistent with the spirit of the NIMH Research Domain Criteria [57, 58]. Treating co-occurring ASD+ADHD as a separate diagnostic category is impor-tant in clinical management of this subgroup. However, a categorical analysis artificially fragments variance and reduces statistical power. In contrast, the additive dimen-sional analysis has higher statistical power and can natu-rally account for covariates such as age and IQ. But most importantly, it isolates the unique variance attributable to each condition. By mapping digital phenotypes to these joint predictors rather than forcing participants into mutu-ally exclusive categories, our approach isolates condition-specific behavioral signatures and helps reconcile prior inconsistencies in the literature. 

## 2. Results 

2.1. A semi-structured interview of a community sample for automatic behavioral analysis 

To measure naturalistic behaviors, 2,529 participants (aged 5-22) of the HBN cohort were video-recorded during a semi-structured interview after watching "The Present", a brief animated film in which a boy’s interac-tion with a three-legged puppy culminates in the revela-tion that both share a missing leg. During the interview, participants were asked identical questions one at a time (Table S1) probing narrative recall, factual memory, emo-tional interpretation, and perspective-taking. We used state-of-the-art computational tools to derive objective, quantitative metrics from the video-recorded interviews, covering expressive language, vocal prosody, as well as facial and upper body movements (Fig. 1a). The cohort was diagnostically rich and clinically com-plex (Fig. 1b, c & Table 1). The sample exhibited an overall male-to-female ratio of approximately 2:1 (Fig. 1d), with lower than chance prevalence in females (15.4% of the ASD group and 29-23.6% of the ADHD group; Fig. 1e). Consistent with the clinical literature [12], a clinician-confirmed diagnostic status of either ADHD-Inattentive or ADHD-Hyperactive significantly increased the odds of co-occurring ASD (Adjusted Odds Ratios (OR) = 1.734 and 1.716, respectively, Fig. 1f). Clinical overlap extended to instrument ratings, which were highly correlated and strongly influenced by age and sex (Fig. 1g). For instance, parent-rated hyperactivity traits decreased significantly with age ( ρ(2095 ) = −0.27, p < 0.001, Bonferroni cor-rected, Fig. 1h), consistent with typical developmental trajectories [49]. The same was also reflected in the effect of age on the prevalence of ADHD-Hyperactive status (Fig. 1f, OR = 0.831). To summarize Fig. 1f, ASD, Hyper-active, Inattentive, Age and Sex are all associated with 

2

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 

Figure 1: Overview of the study cohort. a) Using AI for objective behavioral characterization. Video recordings were processed to quantify upper body and facial movements, while audio was transcribed and analyzed to extract metrics of language structure, semantic content, and vocal prosody. b) Venn diagram showing the distribution and overlap of the primary diagnostic groups. c) The 12 most common clinician-assigned DSM-5 diagnostic categories in the full cohort ( N = 2, 529 ), see Fig. S1 for specific co-occurring diagnoses for the ADHD and ASD children. d) Age and sex distribution of the full cohort, see Fig. S1 for age-sex distributions per diagnostic group in panel b. e) Sex distribution within the children with ASD and/or ADHD diagnostic, ADHD-Combined are here considered positive in both hyperactive and inattentive diagnostic status. The black line indicates chance occurrence based on the sex ratio in the cohort. f) Adjusted odds ratios showing the likelihood of a co-occurring positive diagnosis in individuals with positive specific predictors (or one-year change in the case of age). Females are less likely than males to receive an ADHD or ASD diagnosis (OR < 1). g) Spearman correlation matrix, displaying only significant associations ( p < 0.01 , Bonferroni corrected, white otherwise). The matrix illustrates that clinical instruments for specific neurodevelopmental traits, like ASSQ for autism and SWAN for ADHD, are highly correlated with other measurements like depression (MFQ), anxiety (SCARED), and internalizing/externalizing behaviors (CBCL). They also correlate with age, IQ, and sex, which complicates the attribution of observed behavior to any single instrument scale independently. h) Two-dimensional histogram showing the negative correlation between age and hyperactivity traits (SWAN scale) ( ρ(2095 ) = −0.27 , p < 0.001 ). Full names for clinical instruments (SWAN, ASSQ, MFQ, SCARED, CBCL) are provided in the ‘Clinical Instruments’ section in the Methods. Detailed model statistics for panel F are available in Supplementary Section S1.1. 

3

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 

Table 1: Demographic, clinical, and interview characteristics       

> Characteristic ADHD-Inatt bADHD-Hyper bASD(ADHD+) cASD(ADHD-) cOther Diagnoses Typically Developing

(N = 1424 ) (N = 809 ) (N = 246 ) (N = 60 ) (N = 631 ) (N = 211 )                                          

> Age (in years), mean (SD) 10.1 (3.2)* 9.1 (2.9) 10.1 (3.6) 10.9 (4.7) 10.7 (3.7)** 9.4 (3.3)
> Sex, N (%)
> Female 413 (29)** 191 (24)** 32 (13)** 15 (25) 313 (50) 94 (45) Male 1011 (71) 618 (76) 214 (87) 45 (75) 318 (50) 117 (55)
> Co-occurring Diagnosis, N (%)
> ADHD-Inatt bN/A 702 (87) 227 (92) N/A 1424 (56) N/A ADHD-Hyper b702 (49) N/A 151 (61) N/A 809 (32) N/A ASD 227 (16) 151 (19) N/A N/A 246 (10) N/A
> Clinical Instruments, mean (SD)
> Inattention (SWAN) 1.2 (0.9)** 1.1 (0.9)** 1.2 (0.9)** †† 0.6 (1.1)** †† 0.0 (1.0)

−0.3 (1.0) Hyperactivity (SWAN) 0.7 (1.0)** 1.2 (0.8)** 1.0 (0.9)** †† 0.4 (1.0)** †† −0.3 (1.0) −0.3 (1.0) Autism (ASSQ) 8.1 (8.9)** 9.7 (10.0)** 18.9 (10.9)** 19.0 (11.8)** 4.0 (5.6)* 2.3 (3.2) Depression (MFQ) 9.9 (8.7)** 9.7 (8.0)** 10.8 (8.8)** 8.9 (9.0)* 7.5 (8.3)** 4.5 (4.6) Anxiety (SCARED) 14.9 (12.1)** 14.5 (11.8)** 16.5 (12.4)** 19.1 (14.8)** 14.8 (11.7)** 9.0 (7.7) Externalizing (CBCL) 12.5 (9.7)** 15.2 (9.8)** 13.5 (9.9)** †† 8.4 (7.9) †† 7.7 (8.0)* 5.2 (5.4) Internalizing (CBCL) 10.4 (8.2)** 10.2 (7.9)** 12.4 (8.0)** 12.1 (8.3)** 9.5 (8.2)** 5.1 (5.0)                    

> IQ a, mean (SD)
> Full-Scale 99.0 (16.2)** 100.7 (16.3)** 95.0 (17.9)** 97.2 (21.1)** 100.7 (16.5)** 107.3 (14.5) Verbal 103.5 (16.1)** 104.5 (16.1)** 98.7 (18.9)** 99.8 (21.2)** 104.2 (16.2)** 110.3 (13.6)
> Interview length (minutes), mean (SD) 4.5 (1.4) 4.4 (1.4) 4.6 (1.5) 4.8 (1.2) 4.5 (1.5) 4.5 (1.8)
> a

IQ was measured using WISC-V [59], with exceptions for early study participants using WASI [60], and children under 6 or with an IQ below 70 using KBIT [61]. See the ‘IQ Score’ section in Methods for details.  

> b

ADHD-Combined are here considered positive in both hyperactive and inattentive diagnostic status.  

> c

‘ASD(ADHD+)’ are ASD participants with any co-occurring DSM-5 ADHD diagnosis, ‘ASD(ADHD-)’ without.  

> d

‘Other Diagnoses’ includes participants with one or more positive DSM-5 diagnoses, but negative ADHD and ASD diagnoses. Statistical differences were assessed: 1) for continuous normally distributed measures using independent samples t-tests, 2) for continuous non-normal distributed measures using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests, following normality checks via the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. 3) for categorical comparisons using Chi-square tests. * p < 0.01 , ** p < 0.001 compared to the Typically Developing group (Bonferroni corrected for 5 comparisons).  

> †

p < 0.01 , †† p < 0.001 for the comparison between ASD(ADHD+) and ASD(ADHD-). Detailed statistical reports for each comparison are available in Table S2. Full names for clinical instruments (SWAN, ASSQ, MFQ, SCARED, CBCL) are provided in the ‘Clinical Instruments’ section in the Methods. 

one another. Note that in Fig. 1e-f and in all our analyses, ADHD-Combined presentation is coded as both Inattentive and Hyperactive. To distinguish this coding with two bi-nary variables (Inattentive, Hyperactive) from the three DSM-5 ADHD presentations (Inattentive, Hyperactive, Combined), we will refer to these as diagnostic status and presentation, respectively. 

2.2. Developmental factors dominate over diagnostic effects in structural language 

To characterize naturalistic communication at scale, we processed the audio recordings of the interview using a state-of-the-art AI pipeline that integrates automatic transcription with Large Language Model (LLM)-based diarization. From these transcripts, we extracted objec-tive metrics of structural and pragmatic language abilities (Fig. 2a). To isolate the unique behavioral contributions of each diagnosis while accounting for high co-occurrence and developmental maturation, we employed a multivari-ate regression model. This approach coded diagnostic status as independent binary variables (ASD, ADHD-Inattentive, ADHD-Hyperactive) while simultaneously controlling for Age, Sex, and IQ (Fig. 2c). This multivariate approach demonstrated that struc-tural language abilities are overwhelmingly driven by development, not by ADHD or ASD. For example, a simple univariate analysis suggested a significant neg-ative association between lexical diversity and hyper-activity ( ρ(2049 ) = −0.16, p < 0.001, Bonferroni Cor-rected, Fig. 2b). However, the multivariate model re-vealed this variation was actually driven by the effect of Age (Effect Size=0.474; effect sizes (ES) reported in this study represent Cohen’s d for binary and Cohen’s f for continuous variables; see Methods) and IQ (ES=0.275) (Fig. 2c-d). This pattern held across almost all structural language metrics (Fig. 2e). Older participants spoke more (ES=0.404) and faster (ES=0.553), while females spoke faster (ES=0.171) and answered more coherently (ES=0.149) than males. The only significant diagnostic markers identified in basic language use were an in-crease in self-referential speech (first-person pronouns) (ES=0.337), and reduced between-word coherence (ES=-0.242) specific to participants with ASD, as well as faster speech rate in ADHD-Hyperactivity (ES=0.164). Our planned analysis was to model ADHD and ASD as independent additive effects. We also explored inter-action terms to determine whether the co-occurrence is stronger/weaker than the sum of their parts, but found no significant interactions. Additionally, we explored 

4

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 

Figure 2: Language abilities are primarily driven by development, not by ADHD or ASD. a) The computational pipeline used to extract objective structural and pragmatic language metrics from transcribed audio. b) Hyperactive traits (SWAN) and lexical diversity (Moving-Average Type-Token-Ratio with a window of 10) are correlated ( ρ(2049 ) = −0.16 , p < 0.001 ). However, the color gradient, representing age, reveals that this association is confounded by development. c) Effect sizes from the multivariate model predicting lexical diversity. Effect sizes represent the unique contribution of each factor (Sex coded as Female = 1, Male = 0). For binary variables, the reported effects are Cohen’s d, while for numerical variables, we report Cohen’s f (see Methods). d) A summary matrix of effect sizes from the multivariate model applied to a range of language metrics. The results show the consistent and strong effects of age and IQ, and the general lack of diagnostic effects across most measured aspects of language abilities. Significance cut-off at p < 0.01 (white otherwise; Bonferroni-corrected across the 9 models tested). Detailed multivariate model reports are available in Supplementary Section S1.2. e) Result of the dimensional multivariate regression analysis for lexical diversity specifically. Gray links are significant associations in a pairwise correlation, but only red arrows were statistically significant after including covariates in the multivariate model. Missing links indicate no significant association. Associations shown in Fig. 1f are omitted here for simplicity. 

the alternative approach of modeling the co-occurrence as a separate diagnostic category (ADHD+ASD). These exploratory analyses are treated in the Methods under “Alternative analysis approaches” along with Age inter-actions and other post hoc analyses. 

2.3. ASD is uniquely associated with atypical narrative and idiosyncratic responses 

While structural language remained largely intact across diagnoses, impairments in social communication may often stem from higher-order difficulties in narrative con-struction, thematic interpretation, and social-emotional expression. To objectively quantify these functions, we computationally compared the semantic content of each participant’s interview responses to those of their age-matched, Typically Developing peers, generating an ob-jective measure of "answer typicality" (Fig. 3a-c). After controlling for Age, our models revealed a sig-nificant, divergent semantic response profile specific to ASD (Fig. 3e). An ASD diagnosis was uniquely associ-ated with producing less typical narratives (ES=-0.358, Fig. 3d), showing different thematic understanding – such as failing to convey that the boy and the puppy were similar because they were both missing a leg (Fig. 3f) – (ES=-0.330), providing idiosyncratic descriptions of their own emotions (ES=-0.277), and expressing atypical positive preferences (ES=-0.0352). In contrast, neither the ADHD-Inattentive nor ADHD-Hyperactive statuses were significantly associated with any of these semantic and narrative domains. Despite measuring similarity of responses relative to age-matched controls, age remained a powerful predic-tor across some semantic language use measures (Fig. 3e). This pattern is consistent with increasing conver-gence towards age-normative responses, rather than a drift in the semantics of the responses. Indeed, the ex-emplary ‘typical answers’ for each age bin were remark-ably similar (Table S1), suggesting no age-related dif-ficulties in understanding or answering the questions within the Typically Developing population. Consistent with social-cognitive maturation [48], older participants 

5

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 

Figure 3: Semantic analysis reveals ASD-specific effects on narrative and semantic response patterns. a) The computational pipeline for semantic analysis. Participants’ answers to 23 predefined interview questions were parsed and converted into numerical semantic representations (embeddings). b) Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) representation of the answer embeddings, where similar embeddings are represented closer together. A "typical answer" is obtained from the semantic (cosine) similarity to the median embedding of the corresponding age-matched TD group answers. c) Semantic similarity to the age-appropriate prototype is used as a measure of ‘typicality’. For the narrative recall question in panel A, higher similarity reflects a more detailed and developmentally expected recount of the narrative relative to age-matched peers. Subject 1 provides a detailed answer (high similarity), whereas Subject 3 does not recall the story (low similarity). d) Joint distribution illustrating the positive association between age and the production of more typical narratives, but the delayed development in the ASD group compared to the non-ASD group. e) Matrix of effect sizes from the multivariate model, assessing the impact of diagnosis and demographic factors on various semantic domains probed by the interview questions (e.g., factual memory, emotional description, and thematic understanding). Only effect sizes with p < 0.01 , after Bonferroni correction, are shown in color. See Table S1 for a full list of questions and the typical answers for each age bin, and Supplementary Section S1.3 for detailed multivariate model reports. f) Scatterplot of terms distinguishing ASD (top, purple) from non-ASD (bottom, pink) participants in responses to the question related to thematic understanding, using scattertext [62] (See Methods section ‘Visualization of Distinctive Terms’ for details, and Fig. S2 for visualization of other questions). 

6   

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026
> Figure 4: Automatic vocal prosody metrics reveal an ASD-specific acoustic profile. a) Automatic extraction of vocal prosody features involved transcribing and diarizing speech, thus isolating the children’s speech from that of the adult interviewer, and extracting audio-based features using automatic acoustic analysis [63]. b) ASD participants showed increased dysphonia compared to non-ASD participants, which may be related to an “unusual” voice in ASD. c) Effect Size matrix illustrating the effects of development and ASD on vocal prosody. Effect Sizes in this matrix are estimated again using a multivariate regression model, with

p < 0.01 , after Bonferroni correction. See Supplementary Section S1.4 for detailed multivariate model reports. 

provided more consistent, detailed narratives (ES=0.402) and recalled the movie’s main message more typically (ES=0.373). Similarly, higher IQ was associated with more typical narrative abilities (ES=0.0194), thematic un-derstanding (ES=0.198), and factual memory (ES=0.154). We also observed a secondary finding related to sex, with females tending to produce more typical narra-tives (ES=0.169), and positive and negative preferences (ES=0.242 & 0.181) compared to male participants (Fig. 3e). 

2.4. Autism Spectrum Disorder has a distinct vocal pro-file 

The acoustic patterns of pitch, loudness, and rhythm are critical for conveying the intent of an utterance. To this end, we employed an automated pipeline to extract a comprehensive set of acoustic features from the seg-mented speech of each child, including measures of pitch, loudness, and voice quality (Fig. 4a). Our automated acoustic analysis revealed a distinct vo-cal signature specific to ASD. Controlling for covariates, ASD was significantly associated with increased mean pitch (ES=0.262), greater pitch variability (ES=0.162), and higher vocal loudness (ES=0.307) (Fig. 4c). Further-more, participants with ASD exhibited higher dysphonia (ES=0.509, Fig. 4b) and increased breathiness (ES=0.416). ADHD-Hyperactivity was only associated with pitch vari-ability (ES=0.162) and loudness (ES=0.191). Age again proved to be a dominant predictor, with older partici-pants naturally exhibiting reduced pitch (ES=-0.398) and pitch variability (ES=-0.399). 

2.5. Increased motor activity is uniquely associated with ADHD-Hyperactive diagnostic status 

Motor behaviors are relevant diagnostic features of ASD and ADHD, with hyperactivity being a key diagnostic criterion in ADHD, and stereotypical and repetitive mo-tor behaviors being among the defining criteria for ASD. Yet motor behaviors are rarely quantified objectively in naturalistic settings. Here, we applied computer vision models to extract objective frame-to-frame displacement metrics for the upper body, head, eyes, and face (Fig. 5a). Consistent with typical maturation, age was a strong neg-ative predictor of movement categories (ES ranging from -0.419 to -0.27). Once developmental decreases in movement were ac-counted for, we identified a highly specific motor sig-nature: ADHD-Hyperactive status was robustly associ-ated with increased movement across all measured upper body and facial regions (ES=0.194-0.266) (Fig. 5b-c). Con-versely, neither ASD nor ADHD-Inattentive status were linked to significant changes in motor activity, confirm-ing that objective video-derived kinematics isolate the hyperactive-impulsive domain of ADHD without gener-alizing to the inattentive presentation or ASD. 

## 3. Discussion 

This study applied automated digital phenotyping to a large community sample to isolate behavioral dimensions of ASD and ADHD, demonstrating that while narrative divergence and atypical speech uniquely characterize ASD, increased motor activity specifically marks ADHD-Hyperactivity. Crucially, differences in the structural lan-guage and narrative metrics examined here, which are often attributed to ADHD, are better explained by age, IQ, and co-occurring ASD. Previous standardized assessments suggest ADHD in-volves structural and pragmatic language impairments [64, 65], with community prevalence estimated at 40-45% [66, 67]. However, standardized tests impose heavy demands on executive functions like sustained attention and working memory. Consistent with other naturalis-tic studies [68] our conversational analysis shows that 

7     

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026
> Figure 5: Associations of demographics and phenotype with upper body and face movements. a) We use Google’s Mediapipe computer vision models to obtain framewise locations for anatomical and facial landmarks. We then calculate the average framewise displacement for the different regions of interest. B) ADHD-Hyperactive youth show increased facial movements across the whole developmental spectrum, compared to non-ADHD Hyperactive. C) Effect Size matrix illustrating the effects of development and an ADHD-Hyperactive status on all measures of face and upper body movements. Effect Sizes in this matrix are estimated using multivariate regression, with

p < 0.01 , after Bonferroni correction. See Supplementary Section S1.5 for detailed multivariate model reports. 

once age, IQ, and ASD are controlled, structural, conver-sational language in ADHD, as captured by our auto-mated metrics, appears intact, except for faster speech rate. However, this does not rule out potential ADHD-related difficulties in other linguistic domains not cap-tured here, such as real-time reciprocity or complex dis-course management [69]. Such results extend to higher-order semantic analysis. ADHD was not independently associated with neither narrative nor answer atypicality, indicating that previ-ously reported differences may reflect developmental factors or diagnostic overlap rather than ADHD-specific effects [38, 70]. Apparent communication difficulties in ADHD may instead likely reflect executive dysfunction, such as poor inhibition, impacting speech organization, rather than fundamental deficits in linguistic compre-hension and higher-order narrative interpretation or con-struction [71, 72]. Distinct semantic and narrative diver-gence thus remains a critical differentiator indicating co-occurring ASD in youths with ADHD [73]. Conversely, our ASD cohort exhibited mostly typical structural language trajectories, supporting classic con-ceptualizations of the disorder as a core social communi-cation deficit [5]. The primary structural deviation was in-creased self-referential speech via first-person pronouns, reflecting an asynchrony between linguistic and social development [74], and reduced between-word coherence. Most ASD communication differences emerged strictly in higher-order domains: participants produced less typical narratives, missed overarching thematic ’gists’ [75], and provided idiosyncratic emotion descriptions [36]. It is critical to carefully define what these semantic similarity measures do and do not capture, as the The-ory of Mind (ToM) construct has faced significant recent scrutiny for lacking specificity, predictive validity, and reproducibility, with many ToM deficits actually reflect-ing hidden language barriers or differing cognitive styles rather than an inability to mentalize [76]. Our semantic metric captures statistical divergence from the neurotypi-cal consensus in how a story is interpreted and recounted; it does not directly measure an underlying psychologi-cal inability to understand others. However, because this semantic divergence in ASD persists even after con-trolling for clinically measured language abilities (CELF-Screener [77]; see Fig. S3), it cannot be dismissed as a simple vocabulary deficit. Instead, this naturalistic val-idation aligns with computational analyses suggesting that autistic individuals employ distinct, idiosyncratic narrative styles and words (Fig. 3d, Fig. S2) to describe social and emotive contexts [78,79], reflecting neurodiver-gent thematic prioritization rather than a fundamental language deficit. Alternatively, they may reflect difficul-ties in narrative construction or social understanding, memory, or attentional factors [80]. Using automated acoustic analysis, we objectively quantified the long-observed atypical prosody of ASD [40]. Our analysis confirmed higher pitch and pitch vari-ability [39], while clarifying past inconsistencies by iden-tifying increased dysphonia and breathiness as distinct, ADHD-independent ASD markers, validating clinical descriptions of "hoarse" voices [81]. Except for pitch vari-ability and loudness, these effects were absent in ADHD. Regarding motor behavior, unobtrusive computer vi-sion effectively captured ADHD-related restlessness that typically requires specialized sensors [82,83]. Accounting for age-related decreases, widespread head, upper body, and facial movement specifically marked the ADHD-Hyperactive status. Neither ADHD-Inattentive nor ASD diagnoses affected the global displacement metrics we used here. Because motor challenges are core to ASD [47], the absence of an ASD-associated signal in these global kinematic measures suggests that they may not capture the more specific, repetitive movement patterns often described in autism [46], which may require a more gran-ular movement classification [46, 84 –89]. However, no differences in facial expressivity during naturalistic in-

8 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026

teractions in ASD are consistent with other recent stud-ies [90]. Developmental and demographic factors proved es-sential to the behavioral phenotype, with age robustly driving changes across motor, linguistic, and semantic domains alongside sex-specific profiles. Digital biomark-ers must rigorously disentangle normative trajectories from pathology. Although cognitive ability varies within ASD, [52, 53], influences language [37, 91], and remains controversial as a pure covariate [92], our primary diag-nostic associations remained robust whether Full-Scale IQ was included or excluded (see Fig. S4). While our automated features correlate with clini-cal instruments (Fig. S5) and they can offer enhanced presentation-specificity, they are not intended to replace gold-standard assessments. Traditional tools align more closely with categorical DSM-5 definitions (Fig. S6). In-stead, automated multimodal analysis provides scala-bility and objectivity, avoiding inter-rater reliability is-sues [26]. However, these metrics currently lack qual-itative nuance. For instance, current computer vision models quantify displacement but cannot distinguish between a situational fidget, a neurological tic, and an autistic repetitive behavior or mannerism, which raters are trained to reliably differentiate, for example, in the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) [93]. Similarly, semantic embeddings capture statistical atypi-cality but not the underlying pragmatic intent accessible to human raters. Thus, these tools serve as complemen-tary phenotyping instruments, offering a dimensional overlay for subtle, continuous behavioral differences and allowing characterization at scale. Given the strong developmental focus of this work, it is important to remember that the study remains cross-sectional. The observed age-related differences largely align with known developmental milestones for language [94] and movement [95]. However, longitudinal studies are needed to confirm if these automatic behavioral met-rics track individual trajectories over time. Automatic methods have already shown promise in predicting fu-ture prosody, language, movement, and developmental delay outcomes in ASD [44, 45, 96 –98] and ADHD [98, 99]. Additionally, because individual-level records of ADOS or ADI-R administration were unavailable for this specific dataset, we relied on continuous screening in-struments (e.g., ASSQ, SRS) rather than gold-standard observational subscores to characterize autism trait sever-ity. Furthermore, the generalizability of our findings to the broader autism spectrum must be considered with cau-tion. Because the semi-structured interview paradigm inherently depends on verbal communication and sus-tained social interaction, our ASD cohort included only verbal individuals with mild-to-moderate support needs (see Fig. S7). Consequently, our conclusions on narrative production and speech prosody do not apply to mini-mally verbal individuals. This mild-to-moderate clini-cal profile also likely explains why we did not find pro-nounced motor stereotypies [100], prompting our focus on global kinematics instead, which are better suited to track generalized restlessness. Additionally, our ASD sample is characterized by a particularly high rate of co-occurring ADHD ( 80%). While this reflects the real-ities of community-based clinical samples [101, 102], it underscores that our findings are most applicable to this specific, highly prevalent, and verbally fluent segment of the neurodivergent population. Last, our analytic framework assumed that behavioral presentations of ASD and ADHD add up in individu-als with both diagnoses. This allowed us to identify the main effects of each condition, in line with the NIMH Re-search Domain Criteria that aims to parse out biological or cognitive mechanisms [57, 58]. Prior work on smaller samples suggested that ASD and ADHD co-occurrence may interact to exacerbate effects on verbal fluency [103], and cognitive and behavioral traits [104]. The lack of sig-nificant interaction effects in the present study provided empirical support that the co-occurring presentation is adequately captured by the sum of the independent main effects, at least for the behavioral metrics analyzed here. Future work on ADHD and ASD should validate these brief, video-based measures longitudinally using wear-able sensors and apply them within standardized assess-ments like the ADOS [93]. More broadly, this work illus-trates how brief, standardized clinical interactions can be transformed into multidimensional behavioral measures at scale. A similar approach may be relevant beyond de-velopmental disorders, to include neurological and psy-chiatric conditions where patients present with altered movement, posture, speech, or language. 

## 4. Methods 

4.1. Clinical Population 

This study used video-recorded conversations with 2,529 children (aged 5-22, M = 10.08, SD = 3.38 years) as part of the Healthy Brain Network (HBN) [30]. The co-hort included 1,627 participants with clinician-confirmed ADHD: 722 with inattentive presentation, 107 with hyperactive-impulsive presentation, and 702 with com-bined presentation. An additional 96 showed ADHD traits without meeting diagnostic criteria for a specific ADHD presentation (DSM-5 ADHD-other/unspecified). The sample also comprised 306 individuals with mild to moderate ASD (mostly level 1 according to DSM-5). Of the 1627 participants with ADHD, 246 (15.12%) had a co-occurring ASD diagnosis, a rate similar to those re-ported in previous community-based cohorts [101, 102]. The cohort included 211 Typically Developing individu-als and 631 with other clinical diagnoses, mostly anxiety and learning disorders. This group did not exhibit dif-ferent hyperactive, or inattentive traits compared to the Typically Developing controls and only minor difference in autistic traits (Table 1). Furthermore, despite the wide 

9 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026

developmental range of the study, differences in age dis-tributions between diagnostic and Typically Developing groups were small or non-significant (Table 1 and Fig. S1). The overall male-to-female ratio was 1.81:1 (1630/899). Detailed demographic and clinical characteristics per di-agnosis are available in Table 1. Of the N = 2, 783 participants who enrolled for the interview at the Child Mind Institute and consented to share their data for research purposes, we excluded cases with an incomplete clinical evaluation ( N = 157) and participants for whom clinicians recommended addi-tional testing to rule out ASD ( N = 97). The remaining 

N = 2, 529 had a final clinician-confirmed diagnostic consensus and were included in this study. Notably, no participants were excluded entirely due to general audio or video data quality. Instead, if the available interview recording did not allow for the quantification of a specific measure (e.g., a missing answer to a specific question), that measure was assigned a null value for that partici-pant and was excluded only from the specific statistical models evaluating that variable. Of the 2,529 participants, 1084 (42.86%) were White/Caucasian, 291 (11.47%) Black/African American, 211 Hispanic (8.34%), 50 (1.98%) Asian, and 28 (1.11%) identified as other races. 353 (13.96%) identified as two or more races. 512 (20.25%) participants did not specify, or their race was unknown. 

4.2. Behavioral Task, Data Acquisition 

Naturalistic behavior was recorded during a semi-structured clinical interview following the viewing of an emotive animated short film, "The Present" ( https: //www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XA0bB79oGc ). The film depicts a boy who initially rejects a three-legged puppy given to him by his mom while playing a videogame; in the final scene, it is revealed that the boy himself has a missing leg. The narrative therefore invites viewers to infer the characters’ emotional states and the similarity between them. The subsequent interview was structured to elicit responses related to narrative recall, emotional de-scription, and perspective-taking (Theory of Mind) (see Table S1 for a list of the questions and Table S3 for an overview of related measures). High-definition video (Canon XC15) of the participant’s face and upper body and high-fidelity audio (Røde NT1) were captured si-multaneously for automated analysis. Examples for the interview settings and camera view are available at Fig. S8. 

4.3. Diagnostic Procedure 

The HBN is a large-scale biobank that utilizes acommunity-referred recruitment model to capture the wide heterogeneity inherent in developmental psy-chopathology. As such, the HBN sample is enriched for individuals meeting DSM-5 criteria. Diagnoses within the HBN are determined by licensed clinicians at the Child Mind Institute based on a con-sensus model that integrates multiple sources of infor-mation. The primary diagnostic instrument is the semi-structured Kiddie Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia (K-SADS) [105] for DSM-5, which is ad-ministered to both participants and their parents. The final clinician consensus diagnosis also incorporates be-havioral observations during extensive testing, parental and self-reported clinical questionnaires, and the par-ticipant’s developmental, educational, and diagnostic history. For ASD, the primary evaluation relies on the KSADS autism module and questionnaires (e.g., SRS-2, SCQ, ASSQ), as well as developmental and prior diag-nostic history. We excluded cases where clinicians rec-ommended additional testing to rule out ASD. A limited subset of participants were confirmed with the ADOS (N ∼ 20). Further details on the diagnostic process and clinician-administered assessments are available on the original HBN manuscript [30]. For our analysis, clinician-confirmed diagnoses were modeled to assess the impact of specific conditions. ADHD diagnoses were categorized as inattentive and/or hyperactive/impulsive diagnostic status. Par-ticipants with a clinician-confirmed diagnosis of ADHD-Combined presentation were considered positive for both hyperactive and inattentive. ASD diagnoses were mod-eled as a single binary variable (1 for positive, 0 for neg-ative). The vast majority of these individuals ( > 95%) had mild to moderate presentations (only a few requiring significant support, DSM-5 level 1), consistent with the HBN’s inclusion criteria, which require participants to be verbal (see Fig. S7 for distribution of autism instrument scores). The control group, designated as the Typically Developing Population, consisted of individuals with a confirmed negative diagnostic clinician decision in all DSM-5 categories. 

4.4. Clinical Instruments 

Participants in the HBN are deeply phenotyped using a comprehensive battery of clinical instruments. For this study, we defined ADHD traits using the Strengths and Weaknesses of ADHD Symptoms and Normal Behavior Scale (SWAN) [106], and ASD traits using the Autism Spectrum Screening Questionnaire (ASSQ) [107]. These scales were selected as they showed the strongest unique association with their respective clinician-confirmed di-agnoses compared to other available scales (see Fig. S6). Other clinical instruments used in this study include the Mood and Feelings Questionnaire (MFQ, depressive traits) [108], Screen for Child Anxiety Related Disorders (SCARED-P, anxiety traits) [109], and the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) [110], with two factors: internalizing and externalizing traits. A full description and statistical analysis of age, sex, IQ, and clinical instrument scores for each diagnostic group is provided in Tables 1 and S2. 

10  

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026

4.5. IQ score 

Cognitive ability was assessed using a composite IQ score. Full-Scale IQ scores were primarily measured using the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-V) [59] (N = 2, 152, mean ± SD = 100.4 ± 16.4). Exceptions included early participants who were administered the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI) [60] (N = 30, 98.1 ± 16.2), and children under age 6 or with known IQ below 70, for whom the Kaufman Brief Intelli-gence Test (KBIT) [61] was used ( N = 162, 100.9 ± 16.8). Similarly, verbal IQ scores were obtained by combin-ing the WISC-VCI ( N = 2, 152, 104.7 ± 16.1), WASI-VCI ( N = 30, 99.1 ± 15.7), and KBIT-verbal ( N = 162, 101.3 ± 16.6) scores. Full-Scale and Verbal IQ Compos-ite scores were available for 2,344 out of the 2,529 par-ticipants (92.7%). The main analysis and results were computed using Full-Scale IQ as a covariate. However, the main associations between diagnoses and measured behavior were independent of including IQ as a covariate or not (Fig. S4). Similarly, the results did not change significantly if modeling with Verbal IQ scores instead. 

4.6. Transcription, Diarization, & Question-Answer ex-traction 

Audio recordings were transcribed using the WhisperX model (v.3.3.0, Whisper model large-v2) [111], generating a raw transcript with word-level timestamps. Valida-tion against a manually transcribed and diarized ground-truth dataset ( N = 50, author AS) demonstrated a Word Error Rate (WER) of 3.75% ± 4.59% (M ± SD). To sep-arate interviewer and participant speech, we utilized a custom prompt with Google’s large language model (gemini-2.0-flash). This context-aware approach yielded a Diarization Error Rate (DER) of 3.16% ± 3.97%, signifi-cantly outperforming standard acoustic-based methods (pyannote/speaker-diarization-3.1 [112] DER: 16.35% ±

8.78%). The LLM leveraged the semi-structured interview context to infer speaker turns, avoiding acoustic ambi-guities caused by pitch and/or speech overlap between children and interviewers. A secondary LLM prompt sub-sequently isolated specific interview questions and the participant’s corresponding answers. Complete prompts are provided in the Supplementary Sections S2 and S3. The number of valid answers per question is available in Fig. S9. 

4.7. Description of Behavioral Variables 

Various open-source tools were used to obtain objective measures of language, speech prosody, semantic content, and movement from the interview data. An in-depth description of the measures and their extraction methods is provided in Table S3; the distribution of the measures is available in Figure S10. The code for the extraction of measures is available under the link in the Code Avail-ability section. 

Language and Speech Prosody Measures 

We extracted a set of acoustic and linguistic features us-ing the Openwillis toolkit (v.3.0.5) [63]. Openwillis is a Python wrapper developed by Brooklyn Health that automates feature extraction by integrating previously established open-source speech and natural language pro-cessing tools for the extraction of objective language and speech measures. See Table S3 for a complete description of all measures and their extraction methods. 

Age-Normed Semantic Measures 

To characterize the semantic content of participants’ an-swers, we utilized Google’s ‘Gecko’ text embedding model (text-embedding-004) to generate 768-dimensional numerical representations of each response that capture meaning in a high-dimensional semantic space [113]. To distinguish diagnosis-related divergence from typical de-velopmental immaturity, we adopted an age-normed ap-proach. First, we stratified the Typically Developing con-trol sample into three developmentally distinct age bins: Middle Childhood (5-10 years), Early Adolescence (10-14 years), and Late Adolescence/Young Adulthood (14-22 years). Subsequently, for each of the 23 interview ques-tions, we calculated a bin-specific semantic baseline by computing the median embedding of answers provided by TD participants within that specific age range. We then computed the cosine similarity between each partic-ipant’s response and the baseline of their corresponding age bin. This yielded a score representing how semanti-cally ‘typical’ the response was. Participants with missing answers were assigned a missing score for that question. The interpretation of this score depends on the question’s content; for narrative-recount questions, higher similar-ity reflects greater "typical narrative detail," whereas for questions about emotion, lower similarity may indicate more nuanced or idiosyncratic descriptions. Finally, these 23 individual typicality scores were averaged into con-ceptually meaningful domains based on the function of the questions. These domains included narrative detail, factual memory, thematic understanding, and perspec-tive taking (e.g., describing one’s own or a character’s emotions, or the similarity between the dog and the kid, and how this relates to the kid’s behavior). For example, the ‘self-emotion description’ score was the average se-mantic similarity score across answers to questions 14, 17, 20, and 23 (see Table S1 for details on these questions and examples of the ‘Typical Answers’ for each age bin). The Fisher-Z transform (inverse hyperbolic tangent, artanh) was applied to the semantic (cosine) similarity measures prior to regression analysis to approximate normal distri-butions. 

Movement measures 

We extracted anatomical and facial landmarks from video recordings at the native 30Hz sampling rate of the video recordings using Google’s Mediapipe Holistic model 

11  

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026

(v.0.10.11) on a local machine. The raw 3D landmark coordinates were filtered to remove low-confidence data based on two criteria applied over a sliding window. First, segments with more than 10% missing values in a 2-second window were excluded. Second, segments exhibiting excessive jitter, defined as a standard deviation of the x-coordinate exceeding empirically-defined thresh-olds (0.1 for face; 0.01 for pose and landmarks) in 10-frame windows, were also excluded. A landmark point was considered valid for analysis only if it passed both of these checks. To ensure comparability across participants, the filtered data were normalized. Facial landmarks were aligned to a canonical model using an affine transforma-tion [114] to correct for head rotation, translation, and scale. Body landmarks were normalized by the frame-by-frame inter-shoulder distance to render movements invariant to body size and participant’s distance from the camera. Finally, movement was quantified as the frame-to-frame 3D Euclidean displacement for each landmark. These displacement values were then averaged within predefined anatomical regions (e.g., face, mouth, eyes, and body, see Fig. S8) and across all valid frames to yield a single mean movement score per region for each partic-ipant. Log of the average movement was used to model the effects of diagnosis on such measures. 

4.8. Analytical Approach & Statistical Modeling 

To test our primary research questions, we modeled the relationship between the measurements of interest and clinical diagnoses using multivariate linear regression. The model isolated the unique contribution of ASD and ADHD diagnostic status while controlling for key devel-opmental and cognitive confounders. For each behavioral metric, the statistical model took the following form:              

> Metric ∼Age +IQ +Sex +ADHD Inatt +ADHD Hyper +ASD (1)

with one model for each dependent variable (e.g., speech rate, lexical diversity), and the predictors were age (in years), a composite IQ score (Full-Scale), Sex (coded binary female=1, male=0), and binary vari-ables for clinician-confirmed diagnoses of ASD, ADHD-Inattentive, and ADHD-Hyperactive (ADHD-Combined presentation was modeled as positive in both). Every participant counts as n = 1, with a set of num-bers describing them: Age, IQ, ASD, ADHD-Hyper, ADHD-Inatt. For instance, an 8-year-old boy with an IQ of 90 who presents with ASD and ADHD-Combined is coded as: 8, 90, 0, 1, 1, 1. Models were fitted using the bisquare ‘robust’ linear fitting option in MATLAB (2024b). Variance Inflation Factors (VIF) confirmed that multicollinearity was not a confounding factor (all VIFs 

< 1.3). To quantify and compare the effect of each pre-dictor, we estimated its effect size from the t-statistic as follows: For continuous variables: ES = t

√n = f (2) For binary variables: ES = t

s

1

n1

+ 1

n2

= d (3) Here n is the degrees of freedom, and n1 and n2 are the number of data points for each binary group. These effect size measures allow for comparison across different variable types, even when the number of observations varies due to missing data for a specific behavioral metric. For the binary variables (Sex and Disorders), equation (3) is the traditional Cohen’s d, and for continuous variables (Age and IQ), equation (2) captures the traditional Co-hen’s f . In both instances, it is the effect on the outcome variable over the residual unexplained error. Statistical ta-bles for each model of the behavioral outcome measures, including all beta coefficients, standard errors, t-statistics, effect sizes, and p-values, are provided in Supplemen-tary Sections S1.2-S1.4. All multivariate model p-values reported in the main manuscript text and figures are cor-rected for multiple comparisons using Bonferroni correc-tion by multiplying model p-values by the number of tested behavioral features. To assess diagnostic co-occurrence, we constructed three separate logistic regression models. For each model, one clinical diagnosis served as the binary outcome vari-able, while the remaining diagnoses were included as predictors, alongside age and sex. Crucially, the specific diagnosis used as the outcome was excluded from the predictor set for that model. We report odds ratios (OR) as the exponents of the beta coefficients (Fig. 1f, Supple-ment Section S1.1): OR = exp (β) (4) 

4.9. Alternative analysis approaches 

To further validate our methodological decisions, we con-ducted several additional post-hoc sensitivity analyses: First, although our models accounted for the significant overlap between ADHD and ASD, other co-occurring conditions could have influenced the results. However, we ruled out the impact of child anxiety on our behavioral measures by repeating all analyses while modeling for co-occurring positive anxiety diagnoses, and the associations with ADHD or ASD remained consistent (Fig. S11). Second, although our reference group included individ-uals with other non-target DSM-5 diagnoses ( N = 631), excluding these participants to allow for a direct compar-ison with Typically Developing youths did not alter the significant associations found for ADHD or ASD. Third, to mitigate potential bias from the skewed age distribution, we repeated the analysis, limiting it to the 5–14-year-old subset. All results remained the same, ex-cept that pitch variation was no longer associated with ADHD-Hyperactive status. To clearly distinguish the variance related to Hyperactive versus Inattentive sta-tus, we did not separately code for a Combined presen-

12  

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026

tation, unlike some prior studies [115 –117]. When we repeated the analysis by coding with the Combined pre-sentation instead of Hyperactive status, results on move-ment remained the same, but the effect of Hyperactivity on speech rate and loudness was not there (Fig. S12). Fourth, our planned analysis treated ASD, ADHD-Hyperactive, and ADHD-Inattentive as independent ad-ditive factors (Eq. 1). It is possible that the two condi-tions interact to produce effects on our outcome mea-sures that are not just their linear superposition. To test for this, we conducted a post hoc follow-up anal-ysis that added interaction terms ASD × ADHD-Inatt and ASD × ADHD-Hyper to model (1) similar to [103]. We found that neither was statistically significant for any of the outcome measures (all p-values ≥ 0.17, af-ter Bonferroni-correction). Additionally, we tried mod-eling the data using mutually exclusive groups (control, ADHD-only, ASD-only, and ADHD+ASD), as is often done in the literature [54 –56]. This approach quantifies differences between groups relative to the control group, but does not assign effects to ASD and ADHD dimensions shared in the combined group. As a result, the distinct separation of effects observed in our primary additive model was lost (Fig. S13), supporting our approach of treating these as independent, overlapping dimensions. Fifth, to ensure these semantic differences in the ASD group were not merely artifacts of underlying structural language or vocabulary deficits, we conducted an addi-tional post-hoc analysis controlling for clinical language scores (CELF-Screener [77]). The ASD-associated diver-gence in semantic typicality remained robust (Fig. S3). Finally, the linear model (1) does not include interac-tion terms. For age in particular, this means that the effects of the disorders are modeled as a constant gap between a positive and a negative diagnosis. However, for some behavioral features, the gap appears to increase with age (e.g., Fig. 3d, 4b). Such an overall gap can be detected by model (1) even if it increases with age. In a post-hoc analysis, we included the interaction of age with all diagnostic variables. None of the interactions were sta-tistically significant after multiple comparison correction, while the Bayesian Information Criterion increased over the reduced model for most of the measures, suggesting that we are lacking statistical power to warrant the in-crease in model complexity. Narrowing it to variables with a main age and diagnosis effect suggests that there may be an increasing gap with age for narrative detail in ASD (Fig. 3d, p = 0.004, uncorrected). Conversely, differences appear to diminish with age for pitch in ASD (p = 0.0009, uncorrected). However, note that these are uncorrected and post-hoc analyses. 

4.10. Visualization of Distinctive Terms 

Semantic embedding analysis of the answers is quantita-tive and applies to all questions asked. To gain a sense of what it captures, we conducted post-hoc analyses on the significant ASD-question associations. To identify and visualize terms that distinguish ASD from non-ASD par-ticipant answers, we employed the scattertext library [62]. The horizontal axis represents the log frequency of each term in the corpus, while the vertical axis represents the term’s association with the ASD group, calculated using a Scaled F-Score ( β = 2) and normalized via the normal cumulative distribution function to a range of [−1, 1 ], as done previously for the comparison of suicidal vs non-suicidal terms [118]. This scoring metric was selected to prioritize recall, where values approaching +1 indicate broad usage within the ASD group, and values approach-ing −1 indicate broad usage within the non-ASD control group. See Fig. S2 for the visualization of answers with a significant ASD association. 

## 5. Ethics Statement 

The data used in this study were collected between 2016 and 2023. The HBN protocol was approved by the Chesa-peake Institutional Review Board. Written informed con-sent was obtained from participants aged 18 or older, and from legal guardians for participants younger than 18, which included consent for their data to be shared with external researchers for secondary analysis. Access to the data was governed by a Data Transfer and Use Agreement (dated 6/27/2024) between the Child Mind Institute and The City University of New York, while data analysis was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the City University of New York under protocol number 2024-0867-CCNY (dated 12/14/2024). To protect sensitive Protected Health Information (PHI) inherent in the raw audio and video recordings (i.e., par-ticipant faces and voices), all automated AI processing was conducted entirely locally. Feature extraction using computer vision (Google MediaPipe) and speech tran-scription (WhisperX) was performed on a secure, local machine. No identifiable media or raw biometric data was uploaded to external servers or cloud-based AI ser-vices. 

## 6. Data Availability 

Phenotypical and diagnostic data are available upon re-quest and with the establishment of a Data Use Agree-ment with the Child Mind Institute at https://fcon _1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/cmi_healthy_br ain_network/ . This study used data from Releases 1-11 (publicly available), and Release 12 (yet unreleased). Interview videos are not currently available due to the privacy of the children. 

## 7. Code Availability 

The full code pipeline used for speech transcription and diarization, as well as to extract language, vocal prosody, semantic embeddings, and body and face landmarks, is 

13 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 

publicly available at https://github.com/asortubay/A I_behavioral_analysis .

## 8. Acknowledgments & Funding 

NIH-NIMH P50 MH109429, CA Department of Health, grant to Nathan Kline Institute, Milham (PI). Gemini 3.1 Pro was used to assist in shortening our original text in the Introduction, Results and Discussion. 

## References 

[1] Kogan, M. D. et al. Prevalence of parent-reported diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder among children in the US, 2007. Pediatrics 124, 1395–1403 (2009). [2] Polanczyk, G., De Lima, M. S., Horta, B. L., Biederman, J. & Rohde, L. A. The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a system-atic review and metaregression analysis. Am. J. Psychiatry 164, 942–948 (2007). [3] Polanczyk, G. V., Willcutt, E. G., Salum, G. A., Kieling, C. & Rohde, L. A. ADHD prevalence estimates across three decades: an updated systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Int. J. Epidemiol. 43, 434–442 (2014). [4] Yang, Y. et al. Prevalence of neurodevelopmental disorders among US children and adolescents in 2019 and 2020. Front. Psychol. 13, 997648 (2022). [5] American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-5. (American psychiatric association, 2013). [6] Grzadzinski, R. et al. Examining Autistic Traits in Children with ADHD: Does the Autism Spectrum Extend to ADHD? J. Autism Dev. Disord. 41, 1178–1191 (2011). [7] Hattori, J. et al. Are pervasive developmental disorders and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder distinct disorders? Brain Dev. 28, 371–374 (2006). [8] Hollingdale, J., Woodhouse, E., Young, S., Fridman, A. & Mandy, W. Autistic spectrum disorder symptoms in children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analytical review. Psychol. Med. 50, 2240–2253 (2020). [9] Holtmann, M., Bölte, S. & Poustka, F. Attention deficit hy-peractivity disorder symptoms in pervasive developmental disorders: association with autistic behavior domains and coexisting psychopathology. Psychopathology 40, 172–177 (2007). [10] Nijmeijer, J. S. et al. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and social dysfunctioning. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 28, 692–708 (2008). [11] Reiersen, A. M., Constantino, J. N., Volk, H. E. & Todd, R. D. Autistic traits in a population-based ADHD twin sample. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 48, 464–472 (2007). [12] Simonoff, E. et al. Psychiatric disorders in children with autism spectrum disorders: prevalence, comorbidity, and associated factors in a population-derived sample. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 47, 921–929 (2008). [13] Mulligan, A. et al. Autism symptoms in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A Familial trait which Cor-relates with Conduct, Oppositional Defiant, Language and Motor Disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 39, 197–209 (2009). [14] Reiersen, A. M., Constantino, J. N., Grimmer, M., Martin, N. G. & Todd, R. D. Evidence for shared genetic influences on self-reported ADHD and autistic symptoms in young adult Australian twins. Twin Res. Hum. Genet. 11, 579–585 (2008). [15] Rommelse, N. N., Franke, B., Geurts, H. M., Hartman, C. A. & Buitelaar, J. K. Shared heritability of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 19, 281–295 (2010). [16] Ronald, A., Simonoff, E., Kuntsi, J., Asherson, P. & Plomin, R. Evidence for overlapping genetic influences on autistic and ADHD behaviours in a community twin sample. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 49, 535–542 (2008). [17] Aoki, Y. et al. Association of White Matter Struc-ture With Autism Spectrum Disorder and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. JAMA Psychiatry 74, 1120–1128 (2017). [18] Brieber, S. et al. Structural brain abnormalities in adoles-cents with autism spectrum disorder and patients with atten-tion deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Child Psychol. Psychia-try 48, 1251–1258 (2007). [19] Christakou, A. et al. Disorder-specific functional abnormali-ties during sustained attention in youth with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and with autism. Mol. Psychi-atry 18, 236–244 (2013). [20] Di Martino, A. et al. Shared and Distinct Intrinsic Functional Network Centrality in Autism and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 74, 623–632 (2013). [21] Bedford, S. A. et al. Brain-Charting Autism and Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder Reveals Distinct and Overlap-ping Neurobiology. Biol. Psychiatry 97, 517–530 (2025). [22] Norman, L. J. et al. Cross-sectional mega-analysis of resting-state alterations associated with autism and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and ado-lescents. Nat. Ment. Health 3, 709–723 (2025). [23] Kenworthy, L., Yerys, B. E., Anthony, L. G. & Wallace, G. L. Understanding executive control in autism spectrum disor-ders in the lab and in the real world. Neuropsychol. Rev. 18, 320–338 (2008). [24] Hutchins, T. L. et al. Explicit vs. applied theory of mind competence: A comparison of typically developing males, males with ASD, and males with ADHD. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 21, 94–108 (2016). [25] Barkley, R. A. The ecological validity of laboratory and ana-logue assessment methods of ADHD symptoms. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 19, 149–178 (1991). 

14 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 [26] Rosenthal, E., Waschbusch, D. A. & Mayes, S. D. Differ-ences between mother, father, and teacher ratings of psy-chological problems in children with ADHD and autism: Ef-fect of child diagnosis, sex, age, and IQ. J. Psychopathol. Behav. Assess. 47, 50 (2025). [27] Martinez, S., Stoyanov, K. & Carcache, L. Unraveling the spectrum: overlap, distinctions, and nuances of ADHD and ASD in children. Front. Psychiatry 15, 1387179 (2024). [28] Van Der Meer, J. M. et al. Are autism spectrum disorder and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder different manifesta-tions of one overarching disorder? Cognitive and symptom evidence from a clinical and population-based sample. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 51, 1160–1172 (2012). [29] Kentrou, V., de Veld, D. M., Mataw, K. J. & Begeer, S. Delayed autism spectrum disorder recognition in chil-dren and adolescents previously diagnosed with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Autism 23, 1065–1072 (2019). [30] Alexander, L. M. et al. An open resource for transdiagnostic research in pediatric mental health and learning disorders. Sci. Data 4, 170181 (2017). [31] Corbett, B. A., Constantine, L. J., Hendren, R., Rocke, D. & Ozonoff, S. Examining executive functioning in children with autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactiv-ity disorder and typical development. Psychiatry Res. 166, 210–222 (2009). [32] Geurts, H. M. & Embrechts, M. Language Profiles in ASD, SLI, and ADHD. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 38, 1931–1943 (2008). [33] Bishop, D. V. & Baird, G. Parent and teacher report of prag-matic aspects of communication: use of the Children’s Com-munication Checklist in a clinical setting. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 43, 809–818 (2001). [34] Geurts, H. M. et al. Can the Children’s Communication Checklist differentiate between children with autism, chil-dren with ADHD, and normal controls? J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 45, 1437–1453 (2004). [35] Kim, Y.-S. G., Dore, R., Cho, M., Golinkoff, R. & Amen-dum, S. J. Theory of mind, mental state talk, and discourse comprehension: Theory of mind process is more impor-tant for narrative comprehension than for informational text comprehension. J. Exp. Child Psychol. 209, 105181 (2021). [36] Baron-Cohen, S., Leslie, A. M. & Frith, U. Does the autistic child have a “theory of mind” ? Cognition 21, 37–46 (1985). [37] Tager-Flusberg, H., Paul, R. & Lord, C. Language and com-munication in autism. Handb. Autism Pervasive Dev. Disord. 1, 335–364 (2005). [38] Kuijper, S. J. M., Hartman, C. A., Bogaerds-Hazenberg, S. T. M. & Hendriks, P. Narrative production in children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): Similarities and differ-ences. J. Abnorm. Psychol. 126, 63–75 (2017). [39] Fusaroli, R., Lambrechts, A., Bang, D., Bowler, D. M. & Gaigg, S. B. “Is voice a marker for Autism spectrum disor-der? A systematic review and meta-analysis”. Autism Res. 10, 384–407 (2017). [40] Trayvick, J. et al. Speech and language patterns in autism: Towards natural language processing as a research and clinical tool. Psychiatry Res. 340, 116109 (2024). [41] Hamdan, A.-L. et al. Vocal Characteristics in Children With Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. J. Voice 23, 190–194 (2009). [42] Barona-Lleo, L. & Fernandez, S. Hyperfunctional Voice Dis-order in Children With Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Dis-order (ADHD). A Phenotypic Characteristic? J. Voice 30, 114–119 (2016). [43] Briend, F. et al. Voice acoustics allow classifying autism spectrum disorder with high accuracy. Transl. Psychiatry 13, 250 (2023). [44] Eni, M. et al. Reliably quantifying the severity of social symp-toms in children with autism using ASDSpeech. Transl. Psy-chiatry 15, 14 (2025). [45] Godel, M. et al. Prosodic signatures of ASD severity and developmental delay in preschoolers. Npj Digit. Med. 6, 99 (2023). [46] de Belen, R. A. J., Bednarz, T., Sowmya, A. & Del Favero, D. Computer vision in autism spectrum disorder research: a systematic review of published studies from 2009 to 2019. Transl. Psychiatry 10, 1–20 (2020). [47] Zampella, C. J., Wang, L. A. L., Haley, M., Hutchinson, A. G. & de Marchena, A. Motor Skill Differences in Autism Spec-trum Disorder: a Clinically Focused Review. Curr. Psychiatry Rep. 23, 64 (2021). [48] Hartman, C. A., Geurts, H. M., Franke, B., Buitelaar, J. K. & Rommelse, N. N. J. Changing ASD-ADHD symptom co-occurrence across the lifespan with adolescence as crucial time window: Illustrating the need to go beyond childhood. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 71, 529–541 (2016). [49] Larsson, H., Dilshad, R., Lichtenstein, P. & Barker, E. D. De-velopmental trajectories of DSM-IV symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: genetic effects, family risk and associated psychopathology. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 52, 954–963 (2011). [50] Loomes, R., Hull, L. & Mandy, W. P. L. What is the male-to-female ratio in autism spectrum disorder? A systematic review and meta-analysis. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psy-chiatry 56, 466–474 (2017). [51] Ramtekkar, U. P., Reiersen, A. M., Todorov, A. A. & Todd, R. D. Sex and age differences in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder symptoms and diagnoses: Implications for DSM-V and ICD-11. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 49, 217-28.e1–3 (2010). [52] Joseph, R. M. & Fein, D. The significance of IQ and differen-tial cognitive abilities for understanding ASD. Neuropsychol. Autism 281, 294 (2011). [53] Charman, T. et al. Defining the cognitive phenotype of autism. Brain Res. 1380, 10–21 (2011). 

15 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 [54] Craig, F. et al. Overlap Between Autism Spectrum Disor-ders and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: Searching for Distinctive/Common Clinical Features. Autism Res. 8, 328–337 (2015). [55] Rao, P. A. & Landa, R. J. Association between severity of behavioral phenotype and comorbid attention deficit hyper-activity disorder symptoms in children with autism spectrum disorders. Autism 18, 272–280 (2014). [56] Scandurra, V. et al. Neurodevelopmental Disorders and Adaptive Functions: A Study of Children With Autism Spec-trum Disorders (ASD) and/or Attention Deficit and Hyperac-tivity Disorder (ADHD). Front. Psychiatry 10, (2019). [57] Musser, E. D. & Raiker Jr, J. S. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: An integrated developmental psychopathology and Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) approach. Compr. Psychiatry 90, 65–72 (2019). [58] Cuthbert, B. N. The RDoC framework: facilitating transition from ICD/DSM to dimensional approaches that integrate neuroscience and psychopathology. World Psychiatry 13, 28–35 (2014). [59] Wechsler, D. Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Fifth Edition. (Pearson, Bloomington, MN). [60] Wechsler, D. Wechsler abbreviated scale of intelligence–. (1999). [61] Kaufman, A. S. & Kaufman, N. L. Kaufman brief intelligence test. Encycl. Spec. Educ. Ref. Educ. Child. Adolesc. Adults Disabil. Except. Individ. (2013). [62] Kessler, J. Scattertext: a Browser-Based Tool for Visualizing how Corpora Differ. in Proceedings of ACL 2017, System Demonstrations (eds Bansal, M. & Ji, H.) 85–90 (Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, Canada, 2017). [63] Worthington, M., Efstathiadis, G., Yadav, V. & Abbas, A. 172. OpenWillis: An Open-Source Python Library for Digi-tal Health Measurement. Biol. Psychiatry 95, S169–S170 (2024). [64] Korrel, H., Mueller, K. L., Silk, T., Anderson, V. & Sciberras, E. Research Review: Language problems in children with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder–a systematic meta-analytic review. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 58, 640–654 (2017). [65] Bellani, M., Moretti, A., Perlini, C. & Brambilla, P. Lan-guage disturbances in ADHD. Epidemiol. Psychiatr. Sci. 20, 311–315 (2011). [66] Sciberras, E. et al. Language problems in children with ADHD: A community-based study. Pediatrics 133, 793–800 (2014). [67] Tirosh, E. & Cohen, A. Language deficit with attention-deficit disorder: A prevalent comorbidity. J. Child Neurol. 13, 493–497 (1998). [68] Redmond, S. M. Conversational profiles of children with ADHD, SLI and typical development. Clin. Linguist. Phon. 18, 107–125 (2004). [69] Green, B. C., Johnson, K. A. & Bretherton, L. Pragmatic language difficulties in children with hyperactivity and atten-tion problems: An integrated review. Int. J. Lang. Commun. Disord. 49, 15–29 (2014). [70] Jepsen, I. B., Hougaard, E., Matthiesen, S. T. & Lambek, R. A systematic review and meta-analysis of narrative lan-guage abilities in children with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Res. Child Adolesc. Psychopathol. 50, 737–751 (2022). [71] Geurts, H. M., Broeders, M. & Nieuwland, M. S. Thinking outside the executive functions box: Theory of mind and pragmatic abilities in attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Eur. J. Dev. Psychol. 7, 135–151 (2010). [72] Tannock, R. & Schachar, R. Executive dysfunction as an underlying mechanism of behavior and language problems in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. in Language, learn-ing, and behavior disorders: Developmental, biological, and clinical perspectives 128–155 (Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, US, 1996). [73] Taurines, R. et al. ADHD and autism: differential diagno-sis or overlapping traits? A selective review. ADHD Atten. Deficit Hyperact. Disord. 4, 115–139 (2012). [74] Naigles, L. R. et al. “You’re telling me!” The prevalence and predictors of pronoun reversals in children with autism spectrum disorders and typical development. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 27, 11–20 (2016). [75] Diehl, J. J., Bennetto, L. & Young, E. C. Story recall and narrative coherence of high-functioning children with autism spectrum disorders. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 34, 83–98 (2006). [76] Gernsbacher, M. A. Challenging the Assumption That Autis-tic People Lack a Theory of Mind. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 10, 1001–1002 (2025). [77] Semel, E. M., Wiig, E. H. & Secord, W. Clinical evaluation of language fundamentals. (2003). [78] Losh, M. & Gordon, P. C. Quantifying Narrative Ability in Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Computational Linguistic Anal-ysis of Narrative Coherence. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 44, 3016–3025 (2014). [79] Lee, M. et al. What’s the story? A computational analysis of narrative competence in autism. Autism 22, 335–344 (2018). [80] Landau, E. et al. Context effects: discourse structure influ-ences narrative ability in autism and first-degree relatives. Front. Psychiatry 16, 1588429 (2025). [81] Fusaroli, R. et al. Toward a cumulative science of vocal markers of autism: A cross-linguistic meta-analysis-based investigation of acoustic markers in American and Danish autistic children. Autism Res. 15, 653–664 (2022). [82] De Crescenzo, F. et al. The use of actigraphy in the monitor-ing of sleep and activity in ADHD: A meta-analysis. Sleep Med. Rev. 26, 9–20 (2016). 

16 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 [83] Pecoraro, P. M., Marsili, L., Espay, A. J., Bologna, M. & di Biase, L. Computer Vision Technologies in Movement Disorders: A Systematic Review. Mov. Disord. Clin. Pract. (2025). [84] Cook, A., Mandal, B., Berry, D. & Johnson, M. Towards Automatic Screening of Typical and Atypical Behaviors in Children With Autism. in 2019 IEEE International Confer-ence on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA) 504–510 (2019). [85] Kojovic, N., Natraj, S., Mohanty, S. P., Maillart, T. & Schaer, M. Using 2D video-based pose estimation for automated prediction of autism spectrum disorders in young children. Sci. Rep. 11, 15069 (2021). [86] Lemler, C. et al. Semi-Automated Multi-Label Classification of Autistic Mannerisms by Machine Learning on Post Hoc Skeletal Tracking. Autism Res. 18, 833–844 (2025). [87] Vyas, K. et al. Recognition Of Atypical Behavior In Autism Diagnosis From Video Using Pose Estimation Over Time. in 2019 IEEE 29th International Workshop on Machine Learn-ing for Signal Processing (MLSP) 1–6 (2019). [88] Zhang, Y., Tian, Y., Wu, P. & Chen, D. Application of Skeleton Data and Long Short-Term Memory in Action Recognition of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder. Sensors 21, 411 (2021). [89] Koehler, J. C. et al. Machine learning classification of autism spectrum disorder based on reciprocity in naturalistic social interactions. Transl. Psychiatry 14, 76 (2024). [90] Manelis-Baram, L. et al. Using computer vision to quantify facial expressions of children with autism during naturalistic social interactions. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.110 1/2025.05.14.653948 (2025). [91] Faerman, A. et al. Language Abilities are Associated with Both Verbal and Nonverbal Intelligence in Children on the Autism Spectrum. Dev. Neuropsychol. 48, 248–257 (2023). [92] Dennis, M. et al. Why IQ is not a covariate in cognitive stud-ies of neurodevelopmental disorders. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 15, 331–343 (2009). [93] Lord, C. et al. The Autism Diagnostic Observation Sched-ule—Generic: A standard measure of social and commu-nication deficits associated with the spectrum of autism. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 30, 205–223 (2000). [94] Berman, R. A. Developing linguistic knowledge and lan-guage use across adolescence. Blackwell Handb. Lang. Dev. 347–367 (2007). [95] Eaton, W. O., McKeen, N. A. & Campbell, D. W. The waxing and waning of movement: Implications for psychological development. Dev. Rev. 21, 205–223 (2001). [96] Woynaroski, T. et al. The stability and validity of automated vocal analysis in preverbal preschoolers with autism spec-trum disorder. Autism Res. 10, 508–519 (2017). [97] Wilson, R. B. et al. Objective measurement of movement variability using wearable sensors predicts ASD outcomes in infants at high likelihood for ASD and ADHD. Autism Res. 17, 1094–1105 (2024). [98] Reetzke, R. et al. Patterns of objectively measured motor activity among infants developing ASD and concerns for ADHD. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 63, 663–673 (2022). [99] Bamberger, R. et al. Speech-Based Markers in Paediatric ADHD: A Longitudinal Case-Control Study of Voice Features and Medication Effects. Preprint at https://doi.org/10 .64898/2026.03.25.26348708 (2026). [100] Matson, J. L., Wilkins, J. & Macken, J. The relationship of challenging behaviors to severity and symptoms of autism spectrum disorders. J. Ment. Health Res. Intellect. Disabil. 2, 29–44 (2008). [101] Stevens, T., Peng, L. & Barnard-Brak, L. The comorbidity of ADHD in children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 31, 11–18 (2016). [102] Zablotsky, B., Bramlett, M. D. & Blumberg, S. J. The Co-Occurrence of Autism Spectrum Disorder in Children With ADHD. J. Atten. Disord. 24, 94–103 (2020). [103] Xing, J. et al. Symptoms of ADHD and autism spectrum dis-order interactively predict children’s verbal fluency. J. Atten. Disord. 28, 1092–1104 (2024). [104] Yerys, B. E. et al. Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms moderate cognition and behavior in children with autism spectrum disorders. Autism Res. 2, 322–333 (2009). [105] Kaufman, J. et al. Schedule for affective disorders and schizophrenia for school-age children-present and lifetime version (K-SADS-PL): initial reliability and validity data. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 36, 980–988 (1997). [106] Swanson, J. M. et al. Categorical and Dimensional Defini-tions and Evaluations of Symptoms of ADHD: History of the SNAP and the SWAN Rating Scales. Int. J. Educ. Psychol. Assess. 10, 51–70 (2012). [107] Ehlers, S., Gillberg, C. & Wing, L. A screening questionnaire for Asperger syndrome and other high-functioning autism spectrum disorders in school age children. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 29, 129–141 (1999). [108] Angold, A., Costello, E. J., Messer, S. C. & Pickles, A. Devel-opment of a short questionnaire for use in epidemiological studies of depression in children and adolescents. Int. J. Methods Psychiatr. Res. (1995). [109] Birmaher, B. et al. Psychometric properties of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders (SCARED): a replication study. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 38, 1230–1236 (1999). [110] Achenbach, T. M. Integrative Guide for the 1991 CBCL/4-18, YSR, and TRF Profiles. (Department of Psychiatry, Univer-sity of Vermont, 1991). [111] Bain, M., Huh, J., Han, T. & Zisserman, A. WhisperX: Time-Accurate Speech Transcription of Long-Form Audio. in IN-TERSPEECH 2023 4489–4493 (ISCA, 2023). [112] Bredin, H. et al. Pyannote. audio: neural building blocks for speaker diarization. in 7124–7128 (IEEE, 2020). 

17 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.20.682864 doi: bioRxiv preprint

PREPRINT Silvan et al., 2026 [113] Lee, J. et al. Gecko: Versatile Text Embeddings Distilled from Large Language Models. Preprint at https://doi.or g/10.48550/arXiv.2403.20327 (2024). [114] Silvan, A., Parra, L. C. & Madsen, J. Real-Time Estima-tion of Overt Attention from Dynamic Features of the Face Using Deep Learning. in 2025 47th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biol-ogy Society (EMBC) 1–5 (2025). [115] Conway, K. P. et al. Association between COVID-19 risk-mitigation behaviors and specific mental disorders in youth. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry Ment. Health 17, 14 (2023). [116] Restrepo, A. et al. Problematic internet use in children and adolescents: associations with psychiatric disorders and impairment. BMC Psychiatry 20, 252 (2020). [117] Kramer, E. et al. Diagnostic Associations of Processing Speed in a Transdiagnostic, Pediatric Sample. Sci. Rep. 10, 10114 (2020). [118] Zuromski, K. L. et al. Detecting suicide risk among U.S. servicemembers and veterans: a deep learning approach using social media data. Psychol. Med. 54, 3379–3388 (2024). 

18