Title: Modelling temporal dynamics of suicidal ideation and behaviour across pre- to early adolescence using a Markov framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.02896v1

Published Time: Wed, 05 Aug 2026 00:14:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
Modelling t emporal dynamics of suicidal ideation and behaviour across 

## pre - to early adolescen ce using a Markov framework 

Sieun Lee 1,2 , Ben Cardoen 3, Marianne Etherson 4, Nitish Jawahar 1,5 , Ellen Townsend 6, Kapil 

Sayal 7,8 , Peter Fonagy 9, Aja Murray 10 , Joanna Lockwood 1,11 , Ayan Mahamud 12 , Chris 

Hollis 1,8,11 , Rory O’Connor 4, Dorothee Auer 1,5,13 on behalf of the Digital Youth Research 

Programme 

> 1

Mental Health & Clinical Neurosciences, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham ,

Nottingham, United Kingdom 

> 2

School of Social Sciences, University of Manchester , Manchester , United Kingdom 

> 3

School of Mathematics, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom 

> 4

Suicidal Behaviour Research Lab, School of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, 

Glasgow, United Kingdom 

> 5

Sir Peter Mansfield Imaging Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom 

> 6

School of Psychology, University of Nottingham , Nottingham, United Kingdom 

> 7

School of Medicine, University of Nottingham , Nottingham, United Kingdom 

> 8

Institute of Mental Health, Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Nottingham ,

United Kingdom 

> 9

Research Department of Clinical, Educational, and Health Psychology, University College 

London , London, United Kingdom 

> 10

Department of Psychology, University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh, United Kingdom 11 NIHR MindTech HealthTech Research Centre, School of Medicine, University of 

Nottingham, Nottingham, U nited Kingdom 

> 12

Sprouting Minds (Young People Advisory Group – Digital Youth Programme), University 

of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom 

> 13

NIHR Nottingham BRC, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom 

*Corresponding author: Sieun Lee ( sieun.lee1@nottingham.ac.uk )

## Abstract 

Understanding the dynamics of suicidal ideation and behaviour in youth and the factors 

associated with transition s from thoughts to behaviour s is critical for early identification, 

monitoring, and prevention . Using longitudinal self -report data from the Adolescent Brain 

Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study (n = 11,864) spanning ages 9 to 13 years, we 

developed a time -inhomogeneous discrete -time Markov chain framework to model 

transitions across eight states defin ed by suicidal ideation and behaviour and the co -reported 

presence or absence of non -suicidal self -injury (NSSI). The framework enables inference of 

year -to -year and multi -year transition probabilities , quantification of transition stability and 

uncertainty, and statistical comparison of transition likelihoods . We identified structured but 

developmentally changing transition patterns, including a generally high probability of 

recovery to a no -report state following reports of suicidal ideation or behaviour . Co-reported 

lifetime NSSI marked a distinct trajectory profile characterized by both greater risk and lower 

predictability: children with NSSI were more likely to transition to or persist in suicidal 

behaviour , were less likely to recover to a no -report state , and exhibited greater uncertainty in 

their transition likelihoods compared to those reporting suicidal ideation and/or behaviour 

alone. These findings suggest that NSSI marks not only elevated risk but also greater 

trajectory instability during pre - to early adolescence. By estimating probabilities of escalation, remission, persistence, and fluctuation in longitudinal cohort data, the framework 

provides a systematic, interpretable, and scalable approach to characterising suicidal 

trajectory dynamics in large, sparse mental health data sets , with potential to inform future 

research on monitoring, early prevention, and time -varying risk in youth mental health .

## Main 

Suicide is a leading cause of death among adolescents , with suicidal ideation and self -

injurious behaviour often first emerging in late childhood or early adolescence .1–3 A recent 

systematic review reported that the lifetime prevalence s of suicidal ideation, suicidal 

attempts, and non -suicidal self -in jury (NSSI) among preadolescent children (age <13 years) 

were 15.1%, 2.6%, and 6.2% , respectively. 4 According to the ideation -to -action framework of 

suicide, the development of suicidal ideation and the progression to suicide attempts are 

distinct processes, each influenced by different mechanisms and predictors. 5 Understanding 

the developmental pathways and risk factors associated with this transition is critical for 

improving early detection and prevention efforts .

However, the mechanisms underlying these transitions remain poorly understood because of 

inconsistent findings, limited longitudinal data, and heterogeneity in study populations .6–8

NSSI , defined as self -inflicted harm without suicidal inten t,9 is a robust predictor of later 

suicide attempt .10 Yet the processes by which NSSI contributes to suicidal behavio ur remain 

an active area of investigation .10,11 Most existing research has focuse d on cross -sectional 

associations or model ling longitudinal patterns as linear or continuous, which may overlook 

the complex and unstable nature of suicidal ideation and behaviour , especially in youth. 

Recent longitudinal studies, including those leveraging the large -scale Adolescent Brain 

Cognitive Development (ABCD) study ,12 have shown that suicidal ideation and behaviour in 

youth are often variable and nonlinear, with substantial within -individual variation over time .13 Though important insights have been gained from longitudinal modelling of suicidal 

ideation and behaviour ,14,15 the vast ma jority of research to date has relied on traditional 

modelling approaches that depend on assumptions of continuous change, metric properties, or 

pre -specified trajectories , creating corresponding limitations to our understanding of the 

dynamics of suicidal ideation and behaviour and NSSI in this critical developmental 

period .13,16 Assessments in large community cohorts , such as ABCD Study , are further 

constrained by sparse measurement timing, reporting inconsistencies, and categorical 

symptom frameworks. 

Recent work has approached self -harm as sequential rather than static by modelling the 

ordered patterning of thoughts, feelings, events, and behaviours leading up to self -harm 

episode s. Using the Car d Sort Task for Self -harm (CaTS), lag sequential analyses have 

identified transitions and highlighted antecedent factors including hopelessness and wish to 

die. 17 Extension of this work to high -risk groups 18 and online adaptations in combination with 

Indicator Wave Analysis 19 has further demonstrated structured transitions and clinically 

salient proximal marker s, and how the temporal prominence of these indicators shifts across 

time leading up to a self -harm act .

From a developmental psychopathology perspective , the instability in NSSI and suicidal 

ideation and behaviour observed in preadolescence is not merely a stochastic process but 

reflects a dynamic system undergoing reorganization. 20,21 During this period , rapid changes in 

affect regulation, interpersonal stress , and self -injury functions create feedback loops that can 

transiently amplify or dampen self -injurious and suicidal thoughts and behaviours. 22,23 Such 

instability may represent a developmental signature of emerging self -organization, as 

affective and behavioural systems calibrate to internal and external stressors . Capturing these 

dynamics and their variabilit y over time is critical for understanding the developmental 

architecture of risk and resilience. To address these challenges , we propose a probabilistic framework based on discrete -time 

Markov chains (DTMC )24 for modelling longitudinal transitions between discrete states of 

suicidal ideation and behaviour and NSSI in pre - to early adolescence . Whereas prior 

sequential work, such as CaTS, characterises the ordered micro -temporal build -up to self -

harm episodes, the proposed approach aims to estimate year -to -year and multi -year transition 

structure in a community cohort, where observations are typically large in number but 

categorical, temporally sparse , and noisy. Markov models allow for flexible, data -driven 

estimation of transition probabilities between defined states without requiring assumptions 

about linearity or pre -specified latent trajectory shape. Crucially, we extend standard DTMC 

use by i) allowing time -inhomogeneous (age -dependent) transition matrices, ii) quantifying 

uncertainty in rare transitions using bootstrap confidence intervals and entropy -based 

measures of predictability, and iii) enabl ing quer ies of custom multi -year trajectory 

probabilities so that clinically meaningful patterns such as escalation, persistence, remission, 

and fluctuation can be evaluated directly. The model therefore provides an empirical, 

developmentally grounded way to operationalise ideation -to -action transitions as estimable 

probabilities over specified windows, while preserving the observed volatility of 

preadolescent presentations. 

Here, we apply this framework to the ABCD Study data spanning a follow -up of four years 

(age 9–14 years ) available at the time of this study , focusing on transitions between eight 

mutually exclusive suicidal and NSSI states defined by the presence or absence of NSSI, 

passive or active suicidal ideation, and suicidal behaviour . We first describe patterns in 

prevalence, co -occurrence, and child -parent reporting discrepancies over time . The se result s

highlight the increasing prevalence and intensity of suicidal ideation and behaviour during 

this pre - to early -adolescent developmental window , a period that marks the onset of a

pronounced rise in suicidal thoughts and behaviours across adolescence and immediately precedes the mid -adolescen t peak in self -harm .21,25 We then use the Markov framework to 

quantify year -to -year and multi -year transition likelihoods, assess trajectory uncertainty, and 

evaluate the specific risk associated with co -occurrence of NSSI. 

## Results 

## Descriptive statistics on preadolescent suicidal ideation and behaviour and NSSI 

Prevalence of suicidal ideation and behaviour and NSSI 

Table 1a and Fig ure 1a show the prevalence of lifetime reports of NSSI and suicidal ideation 

and behaviour from baseline (age 9 -10) to 4-year follow -up (age 13 -14) . The prevalence of 

all five ideation -or -action states (NSSI, passive ideation, active ideation, preparatory action, 

and suicidal attempt) generally increase d during this period, especially from age 11 -12. NSSI 

and ideation were more commonly reported than suicidal behaviours , but suicidal behaviours 

increased more sharply compared to the baseline .

Because c hildren often reported more than one type of suicid al ideation or behaviour ,

prevalence was also analysed by individual according to the ir most advanced reported state 

(Figure 1b (top)) . At age 9 -10, approximately 9% of the children reported lifetime suicidal 

ideation or behaviour. This rate decrease d slightly to ~8% at age 11 -12 and then rose to over 

12% by age 13-14. Active suicidal ideation and suicid al behaviour increased more than 

passive ideation , such that by age 13 -14 a larger proportion of children reported more 

advanced stages of suicidal ideation and/or behaviour . This wa s in part due to more children 

at older ages reporting active ideation or behaviour as their first -time report (Fig. 1c 

(bottom) ).

Co -occurrence of NSSI, suicidal ideation, and suicidal behaviour 

Twenty -five percent of the children who reported any lifetime NSSI o r suicidal ideation or 

behaviour at age 9 -10 reported more than one type of self -injurious thoughts or behaviour .Th is co -occurrence increase d as the children got older to 44% at age 13 -14 . Table 2 and 

Extended Data Fi gure 1 provide the detailed breakdown .

Co -occurrence of NSSI and suicidal ity 

Among children who reported NSSI, co -reporting suicidal ideation or behaviour increase d

from 41% at age 9 -10 to 65% at age 12 -13 (Table 2a). Likewise, among those wh o reported 

suicidal ideation or behaviour , co -reporting NSSI increase d from 28% to 47%. The 

percentage of co -reported NSSI also increased from passive ideation to active ideation to 

suicidal behaviour. Among those reporting passive suicidal ideation, 18 -21% co -reported 

NSSI, whereas 30 -42% of those reporting active suicidal ideation and 52 -74% of those 

reporting suicidal behaviour co -reported NSSI. 

Co -occurrence of suicidal ideation and suicidal behaviour 

At age 9 -10 , 48% of children who reported lifetime active suicidal ideation also co -reported 

lifetime passive suicidal ideatio n, increasing to 66% by age 13 -14. (Tab le 2b). Only a small 

minority of children reporting suicidal attempt (8 -14%) co -reported preparatory actions. M ost 

suicidal attempt incidences co -reported on going or preceding suicidal ideation , from 85% at 

age 9 -10 to 96% at age 13 -14 .

Child -parent reporting discrepancy 

In Table 1b and Figure 1c, t he parent report s show ed similar prevalence and patterns to child 

report s, with slightly lower values and a sharper increase in suicidal attempt by age s 13 -14 .

Table 3 summarizes the child -parent discrepancies. Most of the reports across outcomes and 

age were not corroborated between the child and parent : 70 -99% of reports from either child 

or parent were reported only by the child or the parent . This discrepancy was generally higher 

for suicidal behaviours (Prep action (91 -99%) and attempt (79 -90%)) than NSSI (70 -91%) or 

suicidal ideation (72 -88%). There was some decrease in the discrepancies over time . At age 9-10 , 76 -100% of reports were endorsed by the child or parent alone, and by age 13 -14 this 

proportion fell to 47 -85% . However, even at this age , only a minority of NSSI or suicidal 

ideation or behaviour reports (10 -30%) were reported by both the child and parent. The 

remaining analysis in this paper is based only on the child reports , since they directly reflect 

the subjective internal experiences of the youth themselves that may be unknown to 

caregivers .

## Longitudinal transitions and trajectories in NSSI and suicidal ideation and 

## behaviour 

Year -to -year transition probabilities 

The year -to -year transition probability matrices in Figure 2 delineat e the full set of 1 -year 

transition probabilities between NSSI , suicidal ideation , and suicidal behaviour states across 

four time points between age s 9-13 years . States are 1 = no non -suicidal self -injury (NSSI) or 

suicidal ideation or behaviour ; 2 = NSSI only ; 3 = passive suicidal ideation without NSSI; 4 

= passive suicidal ideation with NSSI; 5 = active suicidal ideation without NSSI; 6 = active 

suicidal ideation with NSSI; 7 = suicidal behaviour without NSSI; 8 = suicidal behaviour 

with NSSI . Rows are origin states at year  𝑡  and columns are destination states at year  𝑡 + 1.

The colour encodes direction of transition (green = to a lower state; red = to a higher state; 

orange = persisting in the same state), and opacity encodes probability (more opaque = more 

likely). Cell annotations report the mean transition probabilities with standard deviation. Th is 

representation enables visual comparison of transition patterns across states and years. For 

example, in the lowest matrix (Year 3 to 4), children reporting active suicidal ideation with 

NSSI at age 11 -12 (Row 6) had a 6% probability of transitioning to suicidal behaviour in the 

following year (Column 7 and 8 ), compared with 4% among those reporting active ideation 

only (Row 5, Column 7 and 8 ). Transition probabilit y patterns were relatively consistent over time , with developmental shifts 

in risk and recovery as children got older . A prominent feature across all years was the 

relatively high likelihood of remission or recovery (absence of report of NSSI , suicidal 

ideation, or suicidal behaviour; Column 1 ) which was the most likely next -year outcome for 

all originating states except suicidal behaviour combined with NSSI (Row 8) . This recovery 

probability declined with increasing ly advanced originating state . The transition matrices also 

reveal structured heterogeneity linked to the presence of NSSI (indices 4, 6, and 8) . A 

checkered pattern in row - and column -wise alternation indicates that co -occurrence of NSSI 

modifies transition probabilities in consistent ways. Specifically, histories of NSSI were 

associated with significantly lower probabilities of remission and significantly higher 

probabilities of escalating to or persisting in suicidal behaviour. 

For an alternative interpretation of the data, we additionally constructed simpler transition 

matrices based on five composite states : 1 = no NSSI or suicidal ideation or behaviour ; 2 = 

NSSI only ; 3 = suicidal ideation without NSSI; 4 = suicidal ideation with NSSI; and 5 = 

suicidal behaviour . (Figure 3) . The matrices show overall reduction in the recovery transition 

probabilities ( first column ) and increase in the suicidal behaviour transition probabilities (last 

columns) with increasing age and presence of NSSI .

Year -to -year transition uncertainties 

To evaluate the predictability of year -to -year transitions, we computed the Shannon entropy 

of all year -to -year transitions , where entropy of 0 indicates no uncertaint y in prediction and a 

higher entropy indicates a greater uncertainty . As shown in Figure 4, uncertainty increased 

from passive suicidal ideation to behaviour , with the highest entropy observed in suicidal 

behaviour (States 7 and 8). Across all states and years, those with co -reported NSSI (States 4, 

6, and 8) exhibited significantly greater transition uncertainty than their counterparts without 

NSSI (States 3, 5, and 7 ), indicating a more unstable and less predictable profile . Entropy also increase d over time, which reflects growing heterogeneity in trajectories as children 

age d.

Statistical comparisons and distilling complex patterns 

In Figure 2, we noted a checkered pattern in the transition probability matrices , indicating 

that co -report ed lifetime NSSI consistently influenc ed suicidal transition s. Figure 5 

demonstrates how transition probabilities and uncertainties can be used to investigate such 

specific patterns. Figure 5a plots 1-year probabilities of escalating to or persisting in suicidal 

behaviour from passive ideation (left) and active ideation (middle) and suicidal behaviour 

(right) with 95% confidence interval bands . In all comparisons, children with NSSI show ed 

significantly higher (non -overlapping) probabilities of transitionin g to or persisting in a

suicidal behaviour state . Figure 5b plots 1 -year transition probabilities to recovery (no report) 

from passive ideation (left), active ideation (middle) and suicidal behaviour (right). Here, in 

all comparisons, children with NSSI were significantly less likely to recover . The generally 

wider confidence intervals for NSSI states also align with the higher entropy shown in Figure 

4. 

Figure 6 demonstrates an example of a custom multi -year trajectory query : “What is the 

likelihood that a child reporting passive suicidal ideation at age 9 -10 will transition to 

suicidal behaviour within the next three years , and how does this differ for children co -

report ing NSSI? ” The right panel shows that children with passive ideation at age 9 -10 years 

and no history of NSSI have a n ~7.8% probability of transitioning to suicidal behaviour 

within three years. In contrast, those co -report ing NSSI face a significantly higher probability 

of ~11%. The left panel compares the associated uncertainty, quantified via sequence -level 

entropy . Trajectories originating from passive ideation combined with NSSI exhibited 

consistently higher uncertainty than those without NSSI .Discussion 

Using a time -inhomogeneous discrete -time Markov framework, we quantified how year -to -

year NSSI , suicidal ideation , and suicidal behaviour trajectories evolve d from age 9 to 1 2 in 

the ABCD study dataset . At the cohort level, NSSI, suicidal ideation, and suicidal behaviour 

reports increased over time , with a sharper rise in active suicidal ideation and suicidal 

behaviour from age 11 -12 onwards. Co -reporting of multiple types of ideation or behaviour 

became more common with age. Child - and parent -reports broadly showed similar patterns 

but low concordance, particularly for suicidal behaviours. 

Extending beyond static cohort -summary statistics, the Markov chain framework provided a 

structured account of year -to -year transition dynamics and uncertainty of individual 

trajectories. We found that trajectories became more heterogeneous and less predictable with 

age, with uncertainty rising most from age 11 -12 and varying systematically by the origin 

state. Across years, remission was the most common next -year outcome, but its likelihood 

declined with age and with more advanced states of suicidal ideation or behaviour , while 

probabilities of persisting in or escalating to suicidal behaviour increased. Superimposed on 

these dynamics, a history of NSSI consistently shifted trajectories toward greater risk and 

volatility, with higher likelihood of escalation to or persistence in suicidal behaviour , lower 

likelihood of remission, and higher uncertainty. 

Common limitations in co mmunity data such as ABCD Study are relatively coarse temporal 

resolution and limited qualitative characterisation. Even with these constraint s, our multi -

state Markov framework re vealed patterns in pre - to early adolescent suicid al ideation and 

behaviour, showing how the ir transitions were dependent on stage, age, and NSSI , consistent 

with established theories and evidence on suicide , self -harm, and developmental 

gradients .5,6,10,21,25 Across all ages , the probability of escalation to or persistence in suicidal 

behaviour increased stepwise from passive ideation to active ideation to behaviour, while remission likelihood declined in parallel. The structure suggests systematic dynamics beyond 

noise in this young cohort. The Markov approach thus operationalises the conceptual 

progression in ideation -to -action frameworks 24,25 as state - and age -specific transition 

probabilities, providing interpretable empirical risk estimates . The framework accommodates 

heterogeneous , fluctuating dynamics of remission, escalation, and persistence across this 

developmental window , rather than reducing them to a static outcome or a monotonic pattern 

of worsening or improvement. 

The likelihood of remission in the following year ranged from 73% for passive ideation 

without NSSI at age 9 -10 to 26% for suicidal action combined with NSSI at age 11 -12 ,

suggest ing both optimism and urgency. Although any level of self -injurious thoughts and 

behaviours is concerning , there was evidence that remission is common even among those 

who had previously endorse d suicidal thoughts or behaviours . Nonetheless, an urgent 

response is required because remission declines with increasing age and with more advanced 

states, highlighting early adolescence as a period of rapidly changing transition dynamics. 

One possible interpretation is that suicidal ideation reported at younger ages may be more 

episodic and context -dependent 13,21 , and annual measureme nt may compress within -year 

onset and remission into a single observation. In addition, because the ABCD Study includes 

safety protocols when risk is endorsed 26 , the high remission rate could reflect, in part, a 

combination of natural fluctuation and greater access to monitoring and support following 

disclosure .

The increased likelihood of children co -reporting NSSI transitioning to or persisting in 

suicidal behaviour , and their decreased likelihood of remission , may be explained by several 

mechanisms. NSSI is a well -established predictor of suicid e attempt risk. 27 –29 Co-occurrence 

of NSSI with suicidal ideation or behaviour can indicate more chronic and intense stress or distress (e.g. emotion dysregulation, trauma, interpersonal stressors). 30,31 This is indirectly 

indicated in our results : even at age 9 -10, more than half of the children reporting suicidal 

behaviour co -report ed NSSI, compared to 18.4% and 29.7% among the children reporting 

suicidal ideation. From the ideation -to -action perspective, NSSI can increase capability to 

enact suicidal behaviour. 32,33 Moving from ideation to attempts requires overcoming fear and 

pain barriers, and repeated self -injury is associated with habitua tion to pain and bodily harm, 

thereby lowering inhibition. 32,34 NSSI may also sustain or increase escalation risk when it 

temporarily regulates intolerable affect and then fails to provide relief with increased and 

sustained distress. 35 –37 

An important nuance in our findings is that the NSSI -only group without suicidal ideation or 

behaviour showed similar escalation and remission probabilities as the passive suicidal 

ideation -only group , while active suicidal ideation fared worse than both . This suggests that 

NSSI episodes, as captured by annual ABCD K -SADS categories, represent a heterogeneous 

group, where a substantial proportion may be reporting actions that are transient without 

sustained harm or suicidal intent. In ideation -to -action framing, suicidal behaviour requires 

intent with a capability or volitional factor, and in this developmental window active ideation 

- i.e. a stronger intent - may be a stronger marker for escalation than NSSI by itself. The 

results , however , point to the consistent role of NSSI as an amplifier of risk and volatility 

when it co -occurs with suicidal ideation or behaviour .

Beyond transition probabilities, we quantified the uncertainty of transitions using Shannon 

entropy. Entropy increased with age, state progression, and NSSI, such that children in more 

advanced states, at older ages, and with co -reported NSSI were less pre dictable in their 

transitions. This gradient of increasing uncertainty is in parallel with increased likelihood of 

escalating to or persisting in suicidal action and decreased likelihood of remission. The results reflect a coherent pattern in how age, state , and NSSI shape the direction and 

predictability of suicidal trajectories. 

More broadly, explicit quantification of uncertainty alongside transition probabilities 

address es growing recognition that conventional suicide risk factors have limited predictive 

utility, and their predictive value varies across individuals and over time .13,16,38 Retaining and 

characterising this volatility, rather than smoothing it away , may be essential for 

understanding youth suicidal ideation and behaviour in the context of neurodevelopment .

Early adolescence is characterised by ongoing maturation and reconfiguration of the brain’s 

default -mode and mentalizing systems that support self -referential thought and 

autobiographical evaluation – processes closely tied to rumination and self -appraisal. 39 –41 The 

increasing entropy with age may reflect a growing heterogeneity in social and developmental 

context, alongside risk processes that become increasingly context -dependent and time -

varying .42 Adolescents show heightened sensitivity to social evaluation and peer feedback, 

supported by strong responsivity in socio -affective valuation circuitry .43,44 This social 

reorientation can amplify context dependence and volatility in affect and behaviour as peer 

contexts rapidly change during the transition into adolescence. 

In practice , these findings point toward a more developmentally calibrated and uncertainty -

informed approach to monitoring suicidal ideation and self -harm in children . Rather than 

considering apparent recovery as grounds for discharge or endorsement as benign, it may be 

beneficial to track both the direction and volatility of a child’s trajectory over time. A child 

transitioning from active ideation with NSSI to a no -report state, ostensibly a positive 

outcome, but with high trajectory ent ropy , warrants continued monitoring. Such uncertainty -

informed triage would complement conventional risk level assessment in guiding screening 

frequency , follow -up intensity , and targeted preventive intervention , especially in school or 

primary care settings where clinical decisions must often be made with limited information. These considerations are especially pertinent for children at elevated baseline risk, for 

example, those with a history of adverse childhood experiences or early pubertal onset, for 

whom the window for early intervention may be especially narrow. 

Initially, we explored several analytic approaches to characterize longitudinal trajectories of 

suicidal ideation and behaviour and NSSI and observed substantial fluctuations and 

heterogeneit y in the data . Yet the temporal trends did not appear random , calling for methods 

that can reveal data -driven pattern s without discarding the inherent variability as noise .

Longitudinal mental health data in community samples are often categorical, temporally 

sparse, and volatile , posing challenges to conventional trajectory modelling that assume s

continuous change, metric properties, or pre -specified latent trajector ies . The bootstrapped 

time -inhomogeneous discrete -time Markov chain (DTMC) framework presented here offer s

several advantages : first, the method is computationally simple, interpretable, and 

reproducible, with the transition matrices providing a clear and intuitive overview of cohort -

level dynamics. Second, it has minimal assumptions and requirements – no predefined 

trajectories, latent states, or filtering —, which is particularly useful in a community -

ascertained sample where data acquisition is infrequent and clinically significant outcomes ,

such as suicidal behaviours , are rare . Finally, the model naturally incorporates uncertainty, 

allowing variability in rare outcomes to be represented as part of the probabilistic structure 

rather than being filtered out. 

Building on the DTMC framework, we additionally implemented a query system that allows 

researchers and clinicians to evaluate the likelihood and uncertainty of custom -defined 

longitudinal trajectories using a flexible pattern -matching syntax ( regular expression ) that 

specifies sequences of state transitions . This enables transparent, reproducible answers to 

clinically meaningful questions , such as “What is the probability that a 10 -year -old who self -harms will attempt suicide within the next three years?” or “How does escalation risk differ 

between passive and active ideation?” Compared to case -based enumeration, this approach is 

auditable and scalable . Critically, every queried trajectory yields , in addition to a probability 

estimate , a measure of uncertainty via bootstrapped confidence intervals and entropy . In this 

way, the model can support more nuanced characterisation of longitudinal risk patterns and 

inform the development of monitoring and prevention strategies . The framework may also be 

useful for identifying moderators and mediators of psychiatric risk in future longitudinal or 

trial -based studies. 

Limitations 

Generalizability and attrition bias in the ABCD data 

Although the ABCD Study was designed to approximate the sociodemographic composition 

of U. S. children ,12 prior analyses have shown sampl ing bias toward families with married, 

working parents and higher income levels .45 Longitudinal missing ness and attrition could 

compound these effects. While formal withdrawal from the study stay ed rare, missed visits 

were associated with , among others , being African American, lower family income and lower 

parental education level .46 These may limit the generalizability of our estimates through 

under -repres en tation of families experiencing structural disadvantages. 

Markov property assumption 

The framework assumes the Markov property where a transition depends only on the current 

state and not on prior history. This assumption was not formally tested , and transition 

probabilities are likely influenced by trajectory history beyond the most recent observation. 

However, the framework was specifically design ed to characterize and query a data set with a

few time points and rare events of interest , and first -order Markov models are widely used as 

pragmatic approximations in such cases when higher -order models would be too data -hungry 

and harder to interpret. This limitation is also partially addressed by the multi -year trajectory queries and first -passage probabilities implemented here , which can capture cumulative 

history. The clinically coherent patterns revealed by the framework support its utility as a 

first -order approximation. Extension to higher -order Markov chains would be a natural next 

step, though it would require more data points than are currently available in the ABCD data. 

Temporal ambiguity in the ABCD reporting of NSSI and suicidal ideation and behaviour 

The KSADS -5 questionnaires used in the ABCD study assess both current (i.e., “in the past 

two weeks”) and lifetime (i.e., “in the past” or “ever”) suicidal ideation and behavio ur. The 

phrasing introduces temporal ambiguity, as “lifetime” includes the “past two weeks.” This 

overlap complicates the interpretation of timing, especially in follow -up assessments . A

lifetime event could have occurred prior to baseline, at baseline, or between the previous and 

current follow -up. Even with an assumption of a mutually exclusive split , the data’s annual 

resolution means that nearly one year is condensed into the “past” category , making it 

impossible to determine whether symptoms have newly emerged, persisted, or resolved since 

the prior report. This ambiguity is reflected in the data . For example, current or lifetime self -

harm report was 714 at baseline and decreased to 533 at 1 -year follow -up, and many 

participants endorsing a symptom at one time point would report no lifetime symptom at a 

follow -up. It may be informative to assess whether parent report s are more reliable across 

waves .

The present framework characterises group -level transition dynamics in longitudinal cohort 

data rather than serving as an individual -level clinical risk prediction tool; the latter use 

would require prospective validation in clinical samples. 

Future works 

The mechanisms linking NSSI to suicidal behaviour, including the role of transition pathways 

and the potential lethality of suicide attempts, warrant further investigation. How these 

trajectories are moderated by comorbid psychopathology, gender, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status will be important for improving identification of high -risk subgroups. 

The concept of transient or phase -based self -harm also warrants deeper exploration for this 

age group. Future studies using linkage of community -based cohorts and e lectronic health 

record could help clarify real -world trajectories and evaluate how clinical and community 

responses shape recovery dynamics, complementing what can be inferred from research 

cohorts such as the ABCD study. 

Methodologically, the Markov framework presented here is readily extensible. Incorporating 

demographic, clinical, and environmental covariates as stratification variables would allow 

direct testing of moderation hypotheses within the same probabilistic structure. Applying the 

approach to cohorts with higher temporal resolution, different age ranges, or non -US 

populations would strengthen generalizability. Integrating biological measures, such as 

neuroimaging or genetic risk indicators, as state -defining or moderating variables is another 

natural extension, connecting behavioural trajectories to underlying biological mechanisms. 

More broadly, the explicit state structure and probabilistic architecture of the framework 

make it compatible with richer temporal modelling approaches, offering a foundation for 

future work that integrates time -varying covariates and adaptive prediction. 

## Methods 

ABCD non -suicidal self -injury and suicidal ideation and behaviour data 

The ABCD Study is a large, community -ascertained cohort of U.S. children recruited at age 

9–10 through probability -based school sampling within 21 research sites 12 , designed to 

approximate U.S. demographic distributions, though not a strict epidemiological population 

sample. Baseline data were collected in 2016 –2018 with annual follow -ups thereafter .12,26 In 

the present study, we analysed data from 11,864 children with child -report KSADS data at 

baseline and at ages 10 –11, 11 –12, and 12 –13. Details about the ABCD assessments of non -suicidal self -injury ( NSSI ) and suicidal ideation 

and behaviour were obtained from the ABCD Study publicatio n, 26 Release Note 5.1., and 

examination of the data. Assessments included annual child self -report and biannual parent 

report using the youth version of K -SADS -5.26,47 At each assessment, t he participant 

answered 39 questionnaires (Supplementary Table 1) on the current (“in the past two weeks”) 

and lifetime (“in the past” or “ever”) NSSI and suicidal ideation and behaviour of the child .

Based on the responses, the ABCD team derived binary (presence or absence) DSM -5

diagnostic classifications . These variables were provided separately for child and parent 

reports, and for current and lifetime indicators . In this study, we used the binary DSM -5

diagnostic classification from ABCD Release 5.1 (July 2023) , which contained complete data 

from baseline (age 9 -10) to the 3-year follow -up (age 12 -13) and partial data from the 4 -year 

follow up (age 13 -14) available at the time of release . Child and parent data were analysed 

separately but current and lifetime reports were aggregated to account for the temporal 

overlap and to capture any emergence of symptoms within the full year -to -year interval . The 

binary classifications were grouped into five groups : i) NSSI, ii) passive suicidal ideation, 

iii) active suicidal ideation, iv) suicidal preparatory action, and v) suicidal attempt , as 

tabulated in Table 4.

Data encoding and state definition 

Many children had more than one report (e.g. reporting both NSSI and active ideation). To 

account for all possible responses , each combination of reports was binary -encoded and 

converted in to a decimal composite score as shown in Extended Data Fig. 1. The minimum 

composite score wa s 0 (no suicidal ideation or behaviours ) and the maximum score wa s 31 

(NSSI and all suicidal ideation and behaviour reported ). The scores were ordered from 

passive suicidal ideation to suicidal attempt . The score parity indicate d the presence (odd) or 

absence (even) of co -reported NSSI. Along with the exhaustive tabulation, we summarized each participant’s data by i) their most 

advanced reported state (passive ideation, active ideation, behaviour ) and ii) presence or 

absence of NSSI. Suicidal preparatory action and suicidal attempt were grouped into 

“s uicidal behaviour. ” This yielded eight states: 

1. No NSSI or suicidal ideation/behaviour 

2. NSSI only 

3. Passive ideation without NSSI 

4. Passive ideation with NSSI 

5. Active ideation without NSSI 

6. Active ideation with NSSI 

7. Suicidal behaviour without NSSI 

8. Suicidal behaviour with NSSI 

Descriptive analysis 

Descriptive statistics for prevalence, co -occurrence, and child -parent reporting discrepancy 

were computed for each year . Prevalence was calculated both per report and per participant 

based on the participant’s most advanced state of suicidal ideation or behaviour . Co -

occurrence was described as percentages of children reporting one type of symptom (e.g. 

NSSI) reporting another (e.g. suicidal ideation) at the same time. Discrepancies between the 

child - and parent -reports at each overlapping time point ( baseline , 2-year follow -up (age 11 -

12) , 4-year follow -up (age 13 -14) ) were also calculated . A discrepancy was defined as a

report made by one informant but not the other. 

Probabilistic modelling of longitudinal transitions 

Exploratory visualization of year -to -year trajectories over the four -year period using 

frequency -weighted line plots (Extended Data Figure 2) using the states defined above 

revealed substantial within -individual variability and fluctuation across time points. We also noted that this score was useful but not a true metric. The score combined overlapping but 

partially distinct phenomena (NSSI , suicidal ideation, suicidal behaviour ), and a change in 

the score reflected a transition between qualitatively distinct states, rather than a linear 

increase or decrease . The numerical distance between adjacent values was also not consistent 

in magnitude or meaning. As such, the measure violated key metric properties such as 

symmetry and the triangle inequality, making it unsuitable for distance -based mode lling 

approaches. Given this pseudo -metric structure , the limited number of time points , and high 

volatility of individual trajectories, complex nonlinear or clustering -based models were 

difficult to apply . Th ese, and the clinical relevance of the states themselves, motivated us to 

use a Markov approach , focus ing on state -based transitions .

Time -inhomogeneous discrete -time Markov chain 

A Markov chain is a mathematical framework for mode lling a sequence of transitions 

between a finite set of states, where each transition is governed by a probability. These 

probabilities can be estimated directly from observed data and summarized in a transition 

matrix  𝑃 , where each element represents the probability of moving from one state to another 

in the next time step. In this study,  𝑃  is constructed from year -to -year transitions (Figure 2), 

with rows representing the current state at time  𝑡  and columns representing the subsequent 

state at time  𝑡 + 1. Mathematically, the transition probability from state  𝑖  at time  𝑡  to state  𝑗 

at time  𝑡 + 1 is defined as: 

𝑃 𝑡 →𝑡 +1(𝑖 , 𝑗 ) = Pr (𝑋 𝑡 +1 = 𝑗 | 𝑋 𝑡 = 𝑖 ).

Because the data were collected at fixed intervals, this constitutes a discrete -time Markov 

chain (DTMC). 

Unlike standard Markov chain applications that assume time -homogenous transitions, the 

state -to -state transition probabilities in our data are likely age -dependent and vary over time. For example, the probability of passive suicidal ideation progressing to suicidal behaviour 

between ages 9-10 may differ from the same transition between ages 12 -13. To account for 

this, we constructed a transition matrix for each time point, as  𝑃 𝐵𝐿 →𝑌 1, 𝑃 𝑌 1→𝑌 2, and so on. 

Because the time points are discrete and the transition probabilities are time -varying, the 

resulting model constitutes a discrete -time, time -inhomogeneous Markov chain .48 

Figure 2 visualizes the resulting year -to -year transition probability matrices. Given the full 

annual data from four time points (age 9 to 13) we constructed three year -to -year transition 

probability matrices (Figure 2). In each matrix, the value in the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ row and  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ column 

represents the probability of a child reporting  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ state in one year reporting  𝑗 𝑡 ℎ state in the 

following year. For example, the mean probability of a child reporting active suicidal ideation 

without NSSI at baseline (first matrix, row 5) transitioning to suicidal behaviour without 

NSSI within a year (first matrix, column 7) is about 1%. Each  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ row contains all 

probabilities of a  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ state transitioning to any state in the following year. Probabilities in a 

row sum to one, but due to sampling, the plotted mean values may differ by small amounts. 

The diagonal cells are the probabilities of staying in the same state. The upper -left regi on 

represents moving up in the pseudo -scale of the states, and the lower -right region represents 

moving down. 

Multi -year trajectories and first -passage probabilities 

With the year -to -year transition matrices constructed, we can compute the probability of 

transitioning between any two states across consecutive years using the Chapman -

Kolmogorov equation: 

𝑃 𝑡 →𝑡 +𝑛 = 𝑃 𝑡 →𝑡 +1 ∙ 𝑃 𝑡 +1→𝑡 +2 ∙ … ∙ 𝑃 𝑡 +𝑛 −1→𝑡 +𝑛 

This allows us to estimate the probability of ending at a given state after  𝒏  years, regardless 

of the path taken. In some cases, it may be informative to know the probability of reaching a critical state (e.g. 

suicidal attempt) for the first time within a time window. For example, a researcher may wish 

to estimate the probability that a child with baseline passive ideation progress es to attempt 

within the next 3 years . This can be addressed using t he first -passage probability 

𝑭 𝒕 →𝒕 +𝒙 (𝒎 , 𝒏 ), defined as the probability of first reaching a state  𝑺 𝒏  at time  𝒕 + 𝒙  given that 

the individual started in state  𝑺 𝒎  at time  𝒕 .49 The cumulative probability of transitioning to 

the target state at in any point within the window  (𝒕 → 𝒕 + 𝒙 ) is then given by the sum 

∑ 𝑭 𝒕 →𝒕 +𝒊  

> 𝒙
> 𝒊 =𝟏

(𝒎 , 𝒏 ).

Bootstrapping 

When computed on the full dataset, Markov chain transition probabilit y estimates can be 

sensitive to sampling noise, particularly for low -frequency transitions. To quantify sampling 

uncertainty and assess the stability o f these estimates, we implemented a bootstrapping 

procedure. For each time point  𝒕  and each state pair  (𝒊 , 𝒋 ), the transition probability  𝑷 𝒕 (𝒊 , 𝒋 )

wa s estimated across  𝒌 = 𝟏𝟎𝟎  bootstrap re samples, each constructed by sampling  𝑵 /𝟐 

participants with replacement. The resulting distribution of  𝑷 𝒕 𝒌 (𝒊 , 𝒋 ) reflect s sampling 

variability . Its standard deviation was used as a summary measure of sampling uncertainty, 

and 95% confidence intervals were computed from the bootstrap distribution using t -based 

intervals around the mean. 

Longitudinal transition uncertainty using entropy 

To formally characterise the within -individual variabilit y over time visualized in Extended 

Data Figure 2 , we quantif ied the uncertainty in year -to -year transitions using normalised 

Shannon entrop y, 24 which measures how predictable or diffuse the future state distribution is 

from a given state. F or a state  𝒊  at time  𝒕 , the entropy  𝑬 𝒕 [𝒊 ] is defined as 

𝑬 𝒕 [𝒊 ] = − ∑ 𝑷 𝒕 [𝒊 , 𝒋 ]𝒍𝒐𝒈 𝟐 𝑷 𝒕 [𝒊 , 𝒋 ]𝑵 

> 𝒋 =𝟏

𝒍𝒐𝒈 𝟐 𝑵 where  𝑷 𝒕 [𝒊 , 𝒋 ] is the probability of transitioning from state  𝒊  to state  𝒋 , and  𝑵  is the total 

number of states. Whereas bootstrapping allows for quantification of sampling uncertainty in 

the estimation of transition probabilities, Shannon entropy quantifies the inherent uncertainty 

of the system’s dynamics – the unpredictability of future states given the current one – based 

on how evenly probability mass is distributed across possible next states. 

An entropy of  𝑬 𝒕 [𝒋 ] = 𝟎  indicates a fully deterministic transition and  𝑬 𝒕 [𝒋 ] = 𝟏  reflects 

maximum uncertainty, where all next states are equally likely. Low entropy implies high 

predictability, and high entropy signals unpredictability in the individual’s diagnostic course, 

supporting the need for more frequent or intensive follow -up. 

Custom -defined trajector ies and statistical comparison 

Building on the transition matrices, multi -year and first -passage probabilities, and 

bootstrapp ing, we implemented probability and uncertainty estimation of custom -defined 

trajectories for any longitudinal pattern of interest using a regular expression syntax that 

matches the specific sequence of state transitions. For example, the pattern “^1*[7,8]” 

captures all possible trajectories that begins in State 1 (no report) at baseline and reaches 

State 7 or 8 (suicidal behaviour with or without NSSI) at any later time point. 

Two or more trajectories can be statistically compared based on their bootstrapped 

probability distributions using tests such as Kruskal -Wallis test , reporting mean differences, 

approximate risk ratio, 95% confidence intervals, and p -values. Results can be visualized 

graphically or exported in tabular format for further analysis. This system enables flexible 

and interpretable testing of hypothe ses on longitudinal risk, built directly on the Markov 

framework .

Use of large language models (LLMs) Large language models (OpenAI ChatGPT and Anthropic Claude) were used during the 

preparation of this manuscript to assist with drafting and editing text and with software 

development for the MarkovPatterns.jl package. All LLM -generated outputs were reviewed, 

verified, and edited by the authors, who take full responsibility for the content of this 

manuscript. 

## Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Digital Youth programme, funded by UK Research and 

Innovation, and by the Nottingham Biomedical Research Centre, funded by the National 

Institute for Health and Care Research. The ABCD Study is supported by the National 

Insti tutes of Health and additional federal partners. The views expressed are those of the 

authors and not necessarily those of the funders. 

## Author contributions 

S.L. conceived the study, developed the modelling framework with B.C., performed the 

analyses, interpreted the results, and drafted the manuscript. B.C. contributed to 

methodological implementation and software development. M.E., N.J., E.T., K.S., P.F., Aj a

M., J.L., Ayan M., C.H., R.O., and D.A. contributed intellectual input on the study, 

interpretation of the findings, and critical revision of the manuscript. D.A. and R.O. 

supervised the work. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript. 

## Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

## Data availability 

ABCD Study data is available through the ABCD Study Team: 

https://abcdstudy.org/scientists/data -sharing/ 

## Code availability Source code is available at  https://github.com/slee04/MarkovPatterns.jl . The project is 

implemented in Julia (AGPLv3). 

## References 

1. Brager -Larsen, A., Zeiner, P., Klungsøyr, O. & Mehlum, L. Is age of self -harm onset 

associated with increased frequency of non -suicidal self -injury and suicide attempts 

in adolescent outpatients? BMC Psychiatry 22 , 1 –9 (2022). 

2. Hink, A. B., Killings, X., Bhatt, A., Ridings, L. E. & Andrews, A. L. Adolescent Suicide —

Understanding Unique Risks and Opportunities for Trauma Centers to Recognize, 

Intervene, and Prevent a Leading Cause of Death. Curr. Trauma Rep. 8, 41 (2022). 

3. Moran, P. et al. The Lancet Commission on self -harm. The Lancet 404 , 1445 –1492 

(2024). 

4. Liu, R. T., Walsh, R. F. L., Sheehan, A. E., Cheek, S. M. & Sanzari, C. M. Prevalence 

and Correlates of Suicide and Nonsuicidal Self -injury in Children: A Systematic 

Review and Meta -analysis. JAMA Psychiatry 79 , 718 (2022). 

5. Klonsky, E. D., May, A. M. & Saffer, B. Y. Suicide, Suicide Attempts, and Suicidal 

Ideation. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 12 , 307 –330 (2016). 

6. Grandclerc, S., De Labrouhe, D., Spodenkiewicz, M., Lachal, J. & Moro, M. R. 

Relations between Nonsuicidal Self -Injury and Suicidal Behavior in Adolescence: A 

Systematic Review. PLoS ONE 11 , e0153760 (2016). 

7. Szewczuk -Bogusławska, M., Kowalski, K., Bogudzińska, B. & Misiak, B. Are the 

functions of non -suicidal self -injury associated with its persistence and suicide risk 

in university students? Insights from a network analysis. Front. Psychiatry 15 ,

1442930 (2024). 8. Shi, T. et al. The Relationships Between Nonsuicidal Self -Injury, Connectedness, and 

Suicide Risk in Youth Presenting to the Emergency Department. JAACAP Open 

https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JAACOP.2025.01.001 (2025) 

doi:10.1016/J.JAACOP.2025.01.001. 

9. Cipriano, A., Cella, S. & Cotrufo, P. Nonsuicidal self -injury: A systematic review. 

Front. Psychol. 8, 282818 (2017). 

10. Griep, S. K. & MacKinnon, D. F. Does Nonsuicidal Self -Injury Predict Later 

Suicidal Attempts? A Review of Studies. Arch. Suicide Res. 26 , 428 –446 (2022). 

11. Ammerman, B. A., Burke, T. A., O’Loughlin, C. M. & Hammond, R. The 

association between nonsuicidal and suicidal self -injurious behaviors: A systematic 

review and expanded conceptual model. Dev. Psychopathol. 1–16 (2025) 

doi:10.1017/S095457942500001X. 

12. Garavan, H. et al. Recruiting the ABCD sample: Design considerations and 

procedures. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 32 , 16 (2018). 

13. Wallace, G. T. & Conner, B. T. Longitudinal panel networks of risk and protective 

factors for early adolescent suicidality in the ABCD sample. Dev. Psychopathol. 1–17 

(2024) doi:10.1017/S0954579424001597. 

14. Wångby -Lundh, M., Lundh, L. G., Claréus, B., Bjärehed, J. & Daukantaitė, D. 

Developmental pathways of repetitive non -suicidal self -injury: predictors in 

adolescence and psychological outcomes in young adulthood. Child Adolesc. 

Psychiatry Ment. Health 17 , (2023). 

15. Uno, A. et al. Suicidal Thoughts and Trajectories of Psychopathological and 

Behavioral Symptoms in Adolescence. JAMA Netw. Open 7, e2353166 –e2353166 

(2024). 16. Gariepy, G. et al. Dynamic Simulation Models of Suicide and Suicide -Related 

Behaviors: Systematic Review. JMIR Public Health Surveill. 10 , e63195 (2024). 

17. Townsend, E. et al. Uncovering key patterns in self -harm in adolescents: 

Sequence analysis using the Card Sort Task for Self -harm (CaTS). J. Affect. Disord. 

206 , 161 –168 (2016). 

18. Wadman, R. et al. A sequence analysis of patterns in self -harm in young people 

with and without experience of being looked after in care. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 56 ,

388 –407 (2017). 

19. Lockwood, J. et al. A comparison of temporal pathways to self -harm in young 

people compared to adults: A pilot test of the Card Sort Task for Self -harm online 

using Indicator Wave Analysis. Front. Psychiatry 13 , 938003 (2023). 

20. Oppenheimer, C. W., Glenn, C. R. & Miller, A. B. Future Directions in Suicide and 

Self -Injury Revisited: Integrating a Developmental Psychopathology Perspective. J. 

Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 51 , 242 –260 (2022). 

21. Lewis, C. P., Klimes -Dougan, B., Croarkin, P. E. & Cullen, K. R. Understanding 

the emergence of suicidal thoughts and behaviors in adolescence from a brain and 

behavioral developmental perspective. Neuropsychopharmacology 51 , 259 –272 

(2026) doi:10.1038/s41386 -025 -02168 -2. 

22. López, R., Turnamian, M. R. & Liu, R. T. Prospective Relations between Life 

Stress, Emotional Clarity, and Suicidal Ideation in an Adolescent Clinical Sample. J. 

Clin. Child Adolesc. Psychol. 53 , 944 –957 (2024). 

23. King, C. A. & Merchant, C. R. Social and Interpersonal Factors Relating to 

Adolescent Suicidality: A Review of the Literature. Arch. Suicide Res. Off. J. Int. Acad. 

Suicide Res. 12 , 181 –196 (2008). 24. Shannon, C. E. A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J. 27 ,

379 –423 (1948). 

25. Esposito, C., Dragone, M., Affuso, G., Amodeo, A. L. & Bacchini, D. Prevalence of 

engagement and frequency of non -suicidal self -injury behaviors in adolescence: an 

investigation of the longitudinal course and the role of temperamental effortful 

control. Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 32 , 2399 –2414 (2023). 

26. Barch, D. M. et al. Demographic, physical and mental health assessments in the 

adolescent brain and cognitive development study: Rationale and description. Dev. 

Cogn. Neurosci. 32 , 55 –66 (2018). 

27. Ribeiro, J. D. et al. Self -injurious thoughts and behaviors as risk factors for future 

suicide ideation, attempts, and death: a meta -analysis of longitudinal studies. 

Psychol. Med. 46 , 225 –236 (2016). 

28. Mars, B. et al. Predictors of future suicide attempt among adolescents with 

suicidal thoughts or non -suicidal self -harm: a population -based birth cohort study. 

Lancet Psychiatry 6, 327 –337 (2019). 

29. Hamza, C. A., Stewart, S. L. & Willoughby, T. Examining the link between 

nonsuicidal self -injury and suicidal behavior: A review of the literature and an 

integrated model. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 32 , 482 –495 (2012). 

30. Andover, M. S., Morris, B. W., Wren, A. & Bruzzese, M. E. The co -occurrence of 

non -suicidal self -injury and attempted suicide among adolescents: distinguishing 

risk factors and psychosocial correlates. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry Ment. Health 6,

11 (2012). 31. Voss, C., Hoyer, J., Venz, J., Pieper, L. & Beesdo -Baum, K. Non -suicidal self -

injury and its co -occurrence with suicidal behavior: An epidemiological -study among 

adolescents and young adults. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 142 , 496 –508 (2020). 

32. Van Orden, K. A. et al. The Interpersonal Theory of Suicide. Psychol. Rev. 117 ,

575 –600 (2010). 

33. O’Connor, R. C. & Kirtley, O. J. The integrated motivational -volitional model of 

suicidal behaviour. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 373 , (2018). 

34. Joiner, T. E. et al. Main Predictions of the Interpersonal -Psychological Theory of 

Suicidal Behavior: Empirical Tests in Two Samples of Young Adults. J. Abnorm. 

Psychol. 118 , 634 –646 (2009). 

35. Chapman, A. L., Gratz, K. L. & Brown, M. Z. Solving the puzzle of deliberate self -

harm: The experiential avoidance model. Behav. Res. Ther. 44 , 371 –394 (2006). 

36. Liu, R. T. Characterizing the course of non -suicidal self -injury: A cognitive 

neuroscience perspective. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 80 , 159 –165 (2017). 

37. Koenig, J. et al. High -frequency ecological momentary assessment of emotional 

and interpersonal states preceding and following self -injury in female adolescents. 

Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 30 , 1299 –1308 (2021). 

38. Franklin, J. C. et al. Risk factors for suicidal thoughts and behaviors: A meta -

analysis of 50 years of research. Psychol. Bull. 143 , 187 –232 (2017). 

39. Sherman, L. E. et al. Development of the Default Mode and Central Executive 

Networks across early adolescence: A longitudinal study. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 10 ,

148 –159 (2014). 

40. Borbás, R. et al. Evolving brain function and connectivity patterns during 

mentalizing in children and adults. Commun. Biol. 9, 282 (2026). 41. Crone, E. A. & van Drunen, L. Development of Self -Concept in Childhood and 

Adolescence: How Neuroscience Can Inform Theory and Vice Versa. Hum. Dev. 68 ,

255 –271 (2024). 

42. Casey, B. J., Jones, R. M. & Hare, T. A. The Adolescent Brain. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 

1124 , 111 –126 (2008). 

43. Somerville, L. H. The Teenage Brain: Sensitivity to Social Evaluation. Curr. Dir. 

Psychol. Sci. 22 , 121 –127 (2013). 

44. Foulkes, L. & Blakemore, S. -J. Is there heightened sensitivity to social reward in 

adolescence? Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 40 , 81 –85 (2016). 

45. Heeringa, S. G. & Berglund, P. A. A Guide for Population -based Analysis of the 

Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study Baseline Data. bioRxiv 

2020.02.10.942011 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.02.10.942011. 

46. Feldstein Ewing, S. W. et al. Measuring retention within the adolescent brain 

cognitive development (ABCD)SM study. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci. 54 , 101081 (2022). 

47. Kaufman, J. et al. Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -

Age Children -Present and Lifetime Version (K -SADS -PL): initial reliability and validity 

data. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 36 , 980 –988 (1997). 

48. Ching, W. K., Ng, M. K. & Fung, E. S. Higher -order multivariate Markov chains and 

their applications. Linear Algebra Its Appl. 428 , 492 –507 (2008). 

49. Norris, J. R. Markov Chains . (Cambridge University Press, 1997). Child -report (a) and parent -report (b) prevalence of NSSI and suicidality in the ABCD 

cohort. Left: percentage; Right: percentage normalised by baseline. SI: self -injury; 

IP: passive ideation; IA: active ideation; PR: preparatory action; SA: suicidal attempt. 

b. Parent -report prevalence of self -harm and suicidality in the ABCD cohort. C. 

Percentage of suicidal participants by most severe diagnosis 

a. 

c. 

b. 

Figure 1. Figure 2 

Year -to -year suicidality and NSSI transition probability matrices based on eight states. In each 

matrix, the states are defined as: 1 = no suicidality or nonsuicidal self -injury (NSSI); 2 = NSSI; 3 = 

passive suicidal ideation without NSSI; 4 = passive suicidal ideation with NSSI; 5 = active suicidal 

ideation without NSSI; 6 = active suicidal ideation with NSSI; 7 = suicidal action without NSSI; 8 = 

suicidal action with NSSI. 

Top : From Baseline (age 9 -10) to Year 1 follow -up (age 10 -11). Middle: From Year 1 (age 10 -11) to 

Year 2 follow -up (age 11 -12). Bottom: From Year 2 (age 11 -12) to Year 3 follow -up (age 12 -13). 

> Year 1 → Year 2
> Year 2 → Year 3
> Year 3 → Year 4
> State before transition State before transition State before transition
> State after transition
> State after transition
> State after transition

Figure 3 

Year -to -year suicidality and NSSI transition probability matrices based on five (composite) states. In 

each matrix, the states are defined as: 1 = no suicidality or nonsuicidal self -injury (NSSI); 2 = NSSI; 3 

= suicidal ideation without NSSI (active or passive); 4 = suicidal ideation with NSSI (active or 

passive); 5 = suicidal action, with or without NSSI. 

Left: From Baseline (age 9 -10) to Year 1 follow -up (age 10 -11). Middle: From Year 1 (age 10 -11) to 

Year 2 follow -up (age 11 -12). Right: From Year 2 (age 11 -12) to Year 3 follow -up (age 12 -13).   

> State before transition
> State after transition
> Year 1 → Year 2 Year 2 → Year 3 Year 3 → Year 4
> State after transition State after transition

Mean Shannon entropy of year -to -year transitions based on the starting state. For 

example, the blue circle in State 3 represents the uncertainty in predicting the 1 -

year follow -up state from passive ideation (without NSSI) at Baseline. The solid lines 

pair the with - and without -NSSI states, showing that suicidality with NSSI (State 4, 6, 

8) are less predictable than suicidality without NSSI (State 3, 5, 7). 

Figure 4 Figure 5  

> a.
> b. c.

a. Comparison of year -to -year transition probabilities to suicidal action (State 7 or 

8), between passive ideation without NSSI (State 3) and with NSSI (State 4), active 

ideation without NSSI (State 5) and with NSSI (State 6), and suicidal action without 

NSSI (State 7) and with NSSI (State 8). b. Comparison of year -to -year transition 

probabilities of recovering to no report (State 1) between passive ideation without 

NSSI (State 3) and with NSSI (State 4), active ideation without NSSI (State 5) and 

with NSSI (State 6), and suicidal action without NSSI (State 7) and with NSSI (State 

8). 

> b. Figure 6

Comparison of 3 -year transition probabilities to suicidal action between passive 

> ideation without and with NSSI.

Table 1. Prevalence of non -suicidal self -injury (NSSI) and suicidal ideation / action in the ABCD cohort 

a. Based on child -report 

Time 

point 

Age 

(year 

s) 

Total  NSSI  Passive 

Ideation 

Active 

Ideation  Prep Action  Attempt 

N n % N % n % n % N %

Baseline  9-10  11 ,812  714  6.04  764  6.47  556  4.71  58  0.49  100  0.85 

Year 1  10 -11  11 ,095  533  4.80  717  6.46  499  4.50  56  0.50  91  0.82 

Year 2  11 -12  10 ,883  462  4.25  701  6.44  492  4.52  61  0.56  125  1.15 

Year 3  12 -13  10 ,326  758  7.34  937  9.07  717  6.94  93  0.90  165  1.60 

Year 4  13 -14  4,674  425  9.09  475  10. 2 442  9.46  68  1.45  117  2.50 

b. Based on parent -report 

Time 

point  Age  Total  NSSI  Passive 

Ideation 

Active 

Ideation  Prep Action  Attempt 

n n % n % n % n % N %

Baseline  9-10  11 ,747  466  3.97  773  6.58  431  3.67  56  0.48  39  0.33 

Year 2  11 -12  10 ,756  513  4.77  759  7.06  611  5.68  79  0.73  68  0.63 

Year 4  13 -14  4,754  344  7.24  373  7.85  387  8.14  52  1.09  62  1.30 

Non -suicidal self -injury, passive suicidal ideation, active suicidal ideation, preparatory action for suicide, 

and suicide attempt were defined based on DSM -V diagnoses and grouping as described in Methods. Table 2. Co -report of NSSI and suicidal ideation or behaviour in the ABCD cohort 

a.  NSSI and suicidal ideation or behaviour 

b.  Suicidal ideation, preparatory action, and attempt 

Baseline  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4 

Active ideation as the most 

severe report (n)  441  388  344  495  287 

% co -reporting passive 

ideation (%)  48.3  57.7  63.7  65.3  65.9 

Suicidal attempt as the 

most severe report (n)  99  91  125  165  117 

% co -reporting preparatory 

action (%)  10.1  14.3  8.0  10.9  12.8 

% co -reporting suicidal 

ideation (%)  84.8  92.3  89.6  97.0  95.7 

Baseline  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4 

NSSI (n)  714  533  462  758  425 

NSSI with suicidality (n)  291  254  257  433  275 

% of NSSI co -reporting 

suicidality  40.8  47.7  55.6  57.1  64.7 

Suicidality (n)  1040  910  858  1135  583 

Suicidality with NSSI(n)  291  254  257  433  275 

% of suicidality co -reporting 

NSSI  28.0  27.9  30.0  38.1  47.2 

% of suicidal children co -reporting NSSI by type of suicidality 

Passive ideation  18.4  18.8  17.8  15.3  21.4 

Active ideation  29.7  26.5  26.2  40.8  42.5 

Action  52.0  58.2  60.8  70.8  74.1 Table 3. Child -parent report discrepancy in non -suicidal self -injury (NSSI) and suicidal ideation / action in 

the ABCD cohort 

Baseline  NSSI  Passive 

Ideation 

Active 

Ideation  Prep action  Attempt 

Child only 

(% of report)  599 (84%)  589 (77%)  451 (81%)  58 (100%)  87 (87%) 

Parent only 

(% of report)  354 (76%)  594 (77%)  327 (76%)  55 ( 98 %)  27 (70%) 

Both  110  174  102  1 12 

Either 

(% of cohort)  1,175 (10%)  1,357 (12%)  880 (7.5%)  11 4 (1%)  114 (1%) 

Year 2 

Child only 

(% of report)  300 (65%)  464 (66%)  326 (66%)  53 (87%)  101 (80%) 

Parent only 

(% of report)  325 (69%)  532 (70%)  454 (74%)  71 (90%)  47 (69%) 

Both  156  221  153  5 20 

Either 

(% of cohort)  781 (7%)  1,217 (11%)  933 (8.7%)  129 (1.2%)  168 (1.6%) 

Year 4 

Child only 

(% of report)  248 (58%)  309 (65%)  261 (59%)  58 (85%)  86 (74%) 

Parent only 

(% of report)  160 (47%)  202 (54%)  198 (51%)  41 (79%)  28 (45%) 

Both  177  166  181  10  31 

Either 

(% of cohort)  585 (13%)  677 (14%)  640 (14%)  109 (2.3%)  145 (3.1%) 

Note. For the 'Child only' and 'Parent only' rows, percentages are calculated among all reports made by 

that reporter, including concordant reports. For the 'Either' row, percentages are calculated using the full 

cohort at the corresponding time point. 'Bo th' indicates concordant child and parent reports. Table 4. DSM -V descriptions of self -harm and suicidality and groups defined for the current study . The 

preparatory actions on the questionnaire were reported in a combination of multiple choices and written 

response (1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; 4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave 

away my things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 7=Rese arched methods on internet; 8=Other (type in); 0=None; I 

have not made any preparations). 

ABCD DSM -V Descriptions  Current Study Grouping 

Self -injurious behaviour without suicidal intent  NSSI 

Suicidal Ideation , Passive  Passive Ideation 

Suicidal Ideation Active, Nonspecific 

Suicidal Ideation Active, Method 

Suicidal Ideation Active, Intent 

Suicidal Ideation Active, Plan 

Active Ideation 

Preparatory Actions toward imminent suicidal behaviour  Preparatory Action 

Suicidal Attempt  Attempt 1.  ABCD KSADS -5 Questionnaires 

The data was extracted from the ABCD Data Dictionary: https://data -dict.abcdstudy.org/ 

1.1.  Child report 

Table Name  Variable Name  Variable Label  Notes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1105_t 

You mentioned that in the past 2 weeks you did some things to 

hurt yourself, like scratching, cutting, or burning yourself. 

Were you trying to kill yourself when you did these things? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1106_t  Did you think that you had at least some chance that you 

would die as a result of what you did?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1107_t 

You mentioned in the past two weeks you thought about 

actually wanting to kill yourself. Have you thought about how 

you would do it (even if you had no intention of actually doing 

it)? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1108_t 

At any point in the past two weeks did you have some intention 

on acting on these thoughts, even if you weren't 100% sure 

you would do it? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1109_t 

In the past two weeks, did you think through the details of how 

you would do it, for instance, decide on a specific method, 

place, or time? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1110_t 

You mentioned earlier that in the past two weeks you had 

thoughts that you wished that you were dead. Have you made 

any preparations for killing yourself? 

1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained 

a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; 

4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave away my 

things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 

7=Researched methods on internet; 

8=Other (type in); 0=None; I have not 

made any preparations 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1111_t  Have you made any preparations for killing yourself? 

1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained 

a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; 

4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave away my 

things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 7=Researched methods on internet; 

8=Other (type in); 0=None; I have not 

made any preparations 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1112_t 

In the past two weeks did you start to do something to end 

your life, but either stopped yourself or were interrupted by 

someone else (for example, you were about to take pills or had 

a gun ready, or were about to jump or hang yourself, but either 

stopped yourself or were stopped by someone else)? 

1=Yes, but I stopped myself; 3=Yes, 

but I was stopped by someone else; 

2=No, I did not start an attempt 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1113_t  You mentioned that in the past two weeks you had made a 

suicide attempt. What did you do? 

1=Took pills; 2=With a gun; 3=By 

hanging; 4=By jumping; 5=By cutting; 

6=Other (type in) 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1114_t  Did you think that you had at least some chance of dying as a 

result?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1115_t 

You mentioned that in the past, you did some things to hurt 

yourself, like scratching, cutting, or burning yourself. Were you 

trying to kill yourself when you did these things? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1116_t  Did you think that you had at least some chance that you 

would die as a result of what you did?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1117_t  Please tell me when this happened and what you did. 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1118_t  You mentioned in the past you thought about actually wanting 

to kill yourself. When was that? 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1119_t  Did you think about how you would do it (even if you had no 

intention of actually doing it)?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1120_t 

Back then, at any point did you have some intention on acting 

on these thoughts, even if you weren't 100% sure you would 

do it? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1121_t  Did you think through the details of exactly how you would do 

it, for instance, decide on a specific place or time?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1122_t  Back then, did you make any preparations for killing yourself? 

0=None; I have not made any 

preparations; 1=Bought or stored 

pills; 2=Obtained a knife; 3=Obtained 

a gun; 4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave 

away my things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 7=Researched methods on 

internet; 8=Other (type in); 0=None; I 

have not made any preparations 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1123_t 

You mentioned that in the past, you wished you were dead or 

thought you would be better off dead. Back then, did you make 

any preparations for killing yourself? 

1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained 

a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; 

4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave away my 

things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 

7=Researched methods on internet; 

8=Other (type in); 0=None; I have not 

made any preparations 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1124_t 

Back then, did you start to do something to end your life, but 

either stopped yourself or were interrupted by someone else 

(for example, you were about to take pills or had a gun ready, 

or were about to jump or hang yourself, but either stopped 

yourself or were stopped by someone else)? 

1=Yes, but I stopped myself; 3=Yes, 

but I was stopped by someone else; 

2=No, I did not start an attempt 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1125_t 

You mentioned that there was a time in the past when you 

made a suicide attempt. How many times in the past have you 

tried to kill yourself? 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1126_t  Please tell me when this happened and what you did. 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1127_t  Did you think that you had at least some chance of dying as a 

result?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_819_t 

Sometimes when kids get upset or feel numb, they may do 

things to hurt themselves, like scratching, cutting, or burning 

themselves. In the past two weeks, how often have you done 

any of these things or other things to try to hurt yourself? 

0=Not at all; 1=Rarely; 2=Several 

days; 3=More than half the days; 

4=Nearly every day 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_820_t 

Was there ever a time in the past when you did things to hurt 

yourself on purpose because you were upset, like cut, scratch 

or burn yourself? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_821_t  Was there ever another time in the past when you did things to 

hurt yourself on purpose, like cut, scratch or burn yourself?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_822_t  When was that? mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_823_t  In the past two weeks, how often have you wished you were 

dead or had thoughts that you would be better off dead? 

0=Not at all; 1=Rarely; 2=Several 

days; 3=More than half the days; 

4=Nearly every day 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_824_t  Was there ever a time in the past when you often wished you 

were dead or thought you would be better off dead?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_825_t 

Was there ever another time in the past when you often 

wished you were dead or thought you would be better off 

dead? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_826_t  When was that? 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_827_t  In the past two weeks, how often did you think seriously about 

wanting to kill yourself? 

0=Not at all; 1=Rarely; 2=Several 

days; 3=More than half the days; 

4=Nearly every day 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_828_t  Was there ever a time when you thought about wanting to kill 

yourself?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_829_t  Was there ever another time when you thought about wanting 

to kill yourself?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_830_t  In the past two weeks, did you make a suicide attempt and do 

something to try to kill yourself?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_831_t  I appreciate you telling me that. I will ask you more about that 

later. 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_832_t  Was there ever a time when you did something to try to kill 

yourself and actually made a suicide attempt?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_833_t  Was there ever another time when you did something to try to 

kill yourself and made a suicide attempt?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_y_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_834_t  I appreciate you telling me that. I will ask you more about that 

later.      

> Table 1.KSADS -Suicidality (Indiv. Questions) for child

1.2 Parent Report 

Table Name  Variable Name  Variable Label  Notes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1105_p  You mentioned that in the past 2 weeks your child did some 

things to hurt himself or herself, like scratching, cutting, or  0=No; 1=Yes burning themself. Was your child trying to kill themself when 

he or she did these things? 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1106_p  Did your child think that he or she had at least some chance 

that they would die as a result of what they did?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1107_p 

You mentioned in the past two weeks your child thought about 

actually wanting to kill himself or herself. Has your child 

thought about how they would do it (even if they had no 

intention of actually doing it)? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1108_p 

At any point in the past two weeks did your child have some 

intention on acting on these thoughts, even if they weren't 

100% sure they would do it? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1109_p 

In the past two weeks, did your child think through the details 

of how he or she would do it, for instance, decide on a specific 

method, place, or time? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1110_p 

You mentioned earlier that in the past two weeks your child 

had thoughts that he or she wished that they were dead. Has 

your child made any preparations for killing him/herself? 

1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained 

a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; 

4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave away my 

things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 

7=Researched methods on internet; 

8=Other (type in); 0=None; I have not 

made any preparations 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1111_p  Has your child made any preparations for killing him/herself? 

1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained 

a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; 

4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave away my 

things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 

7=Researched methods on internet; 

8=Other (type in); 0=None; I have not 

made any preparations 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1112_p 

In the past two weeks did your child start to do something to 

end his or her life, but either stopped themself or were 

interrupted by someone else (for example, your child was 

about to take pills or had a gun ready, or was about to jump or 

1=Yes, but I stopped myself; 3=Yes, 

but I was stopped by someone else; 

2=No, I did not start an attempt hang themself, but either stopped themself or were stopped 

by someone else)? 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1113_p  You mentioned that in the past two weeks your child had made 

a suicide attempt. What did your child do? 

1=Took pills; 2=With a gun; 3=By 

hanging; 4=By jumping; 5=By cutting; 

6=Other (type in) 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1114_p  Did your child think that he or she had at least some chance of 

dying as a result?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1115_p 

You mentioned that in the past, your child did some things to 

hurt himself or herself, like scratching, cutting, or burning 

themself. Was your child trying to kill him or herself by doing 

these things? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1116_p  Did your child think that he or she had at least some chance 

that they would die as a result of what they did?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1117_p  Please tell me when this happened and what your child did. 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1118_p  You mentioned in the past your child thought about actually 

wanting to kill himself or herself. When was that? 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1119_p  Did your child think about how they would do it (even if they 

had no intention of actually doing it)?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1120_p 

Back then, at any point did your child have some intention on 

acting on these thoughts, even if they weren't 100% sure they 

would do it? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1121_p 

Did your child think through the details of exactly how he or 

she would do it, for instance, decide on a specific place or 

time? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1122_p  Back then, did your child make any preparations for killing 

themself? 

1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained 

a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; 

4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave away my 

things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 

7=Researched methods on internet; 

8=Other (type in); 0=None; I have not 

made any preparations 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1123_p  You mentioned that in the past, your child wished he or she 

were dead or thought he or she would be better off dead. Back 

1=Bought or stored pills; 2=Obtained 

a knife; 3=Obtained a gun; then, did he or she make any preparations for killing himself or 

herself? 

4=Obtained a rope; 5=Gave away my 

things; 6=Wrote a suicide note; 

7=Researched methods on internet; 

8=Other (type in); 0=None; I have not 

made any preparations 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1124_p 

Back then, did your child start to do something to end their 

life, but either stopped themself or were interrupted by 

someone else (for example, your child was about to take pills 

or had a gun ready, or was about to jump or hang themself, but 

either stoppe d themself or were stopped by someone else)? 

1=Yes, but I stopped myself; 3=Yes, 

but I was stopped by someone else; 

2=No, I did not start an attempt 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1125_p 

You mentioned that were was a time in the past when your 

child made a suicide attempt. How many times in the past has 

your child attempted suicide? 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1126_p  Please tell me when this happened and what your child did. 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_1127_p  Did your child think that they had at least some chance of 

dying as a result?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_819_p 

Sometimes when kids get upset or feel numb, they may do 

some things to hurt themselves, like scratching, cutting, or 

burning themselves. In the past two weeks, how often has your 

child done any of these things or other things to try to hurt 

himself or hers elf? 

0=Not at all; 1=Rarely; 2=Several 

days; 3=More than half the days; 

4=Nearly every day 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_820_p 

Was there ever a time in the past when your child did things to 

hurt himself or herself on purpose because your child was 

upset, like cut, scratch or burn himself or herself? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_821_p 

Was there ever another time in the past when your child did 

things to hurt himself or herself on purpose, like cut, scratch 

or burn himself or herself? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_822_p  When was that? 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_823_p 

In the past two weeks, how often has your child wished he or 

she was dead or had thoughts that he or she would be better 

off dead? 

0=Not at all; 1=Rarely; 2=Several 

days; 3=More than half the days; 

4=Nearly every day mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_824_p 

Was there ever a time in the past when your child often wished 

he or she was dead or thought he or she would be better off 

dead? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_825_p 

Was there ever another time in the past when your child often 

wished he or she was dead or thought he or she would be 

better off dead? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_826_p  When was that? 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_827_p  In the past two weeks, how often did your child think about 

actually wanting to kill himself or herself? 

0=Not at all; 1=Rarely; 2=Several 

days; 3=More than half the days; 

4=Nearly every day 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_828_p  Was there ever a time when your child thought about wanting 

to kill himself or herself?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_829_p  Was there ever another time when your child thought about 

wanting to kill himself or herself?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_830_p  In the past two weeks, did your child actually do something to 

kill himself or herself and make a suicide attempt?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_831_p  I appreciate you telling me that. I will ask you more about that 

later. 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_832_p  Was there ever a time when your child did something to try to 

kill himself or herself and actually made a suicide attempt?  0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_833_p 

Was there ever another time when your child did something to 

try to kill himself or herself and actually made a suicide 

attempt? 

0=No; 1=Yes 

mh_p_ksads_si  ksads_suicidal_raw_834_p  I appreciate you telling me that. I will ask you more about that 

later. Attempt Preparatory                                                                                                                                                         

> Action
> Active
> Ideation
> Passive
> Ideation NSSI Score
> 1111131
> 1111030
> 1110129
> 1110028
> 1101127
> 1101026
> 1100125
> 1100024
> 1011123
> 1011022
> 1010121
> 1010020
> 1001119
> 1001018
> 1000117
> 1000016
> 0111115
> 0111014
> 0110113
> 0110012
> 0101111
> 0101010
> 010019
> 010008
> 001117
> 001106
> 001015
> 001004
> 000113
> 000102

## Extended Data Fig. 1. a) composite scoring 

## based on individual suicidal ideation, 

## suicidal behaviour, and non -suicidal self -

## injury reports. The colour coding indicates 

## the most advanced suicidal ideation or 

## behaviour reported: green is without suicidal 

## ideation or behaviour, yellow is passive 

## ideation, orange is active ideation, and red is 

## suicidal behaviour. b) frequency charts of 

## composite scores from baseline (age 9 -10) 

## to Year 4 follow up (age 13 -14). As the cohort 

## ages, there is a noticeable increase in active 

## ideation and suicidal behaviour reports. 

# a) 

# b) 

## Age 9 -10  Age 10 -11 

## Age 11 -12  Age 12 -13 

## Age 13 -14 Extended Data Fig. 2. Left: Trajectories of all children; Right: Trajectories of children who reported passive 

## ideation (State 2) at baseline (age 9 -10). The weight of each line segment indicates the frequency. This 

## illustrates the high variability and fluctuation in the data.