Title: HARMONY: A large-scale harmonized neuroimaging dataset for research on anxious misery disorders

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748v1.full.pdf

Published Time: Sat, 04 Jul 2026 20:34:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
HARMONY: A large-scale harmonized neuroimaging dataset for research on anxious misery disorders 

Setthanan Jarukasemkit 1,2,3 , Michael P. Harms 4, Petra Lenzini 1, Andrew Chen 5, Matthew F. Glasser 1,6,7 ,Kassandra Hamilton 1, Liangfang Li 8, Xiaoke Luo 1, Michael Myers 1, Adam R. Pines 8, Erin Reid 1, Leonardo Tozzi 8, Artemis Zavaliangos-Petropulu 9, Jiahe Zhang 10 , Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli 10 *, Katherine L. Narr 9*, Leanne M. Williams 8*, Yvette Sheline 11 *, Janine D. Bijsterbosch 1*

* Equally credited senior authors 

1.  Department of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA 

2.  Division Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10400, Thailand 

3.  Cognitive Clinical and Computational Neuroscience (CCCN) Center of Excellence, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand 

4.  Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA 

5.  Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC 29425, USA 

6.  Department of Neuroscience, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA 

7.  Department of Biomedical Engineering, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA 

8.  Stanford Center for Precision Mental Health, Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94304, USA 

9.  Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA 

10.  Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA 

11.  Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 

Corresponding author: Janine Bijsterbosch,  janine.bijsterbosch@wustl.edu 

1

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Abstract 

Patterns of brain circuit dysfunction underlying depression and anxiety have been increasingly characterized, including dimensional and subtype variation. A key challenge is determining how such patterns generalize across populations and measurement frameworks. Here, we introduce HARMONY, a harmonized multimodal neuroimaging dataset supporting large-scale investigation of brainвҖ“behavior associations across symptom-defined dimensions. HARMONY integrates four Human Connectome ProjectвҖ“style Connectomes Related to Human Disease cohorts spanning adolescence to later adulthood and capturing anxious misery symptoms. The resource combines standardized HCP-style preprocessing, quality control, imaging-derived phenotypes, and harmonized symptom measures into a clinically enriched public dataset. Proof-of-concept analyses using HARMONY showed that pooling heterogeneous cohorts increased statistical power for detecting associations between imaging-derived phenotypes and anhedonia and depression severity. Effect sizes remained modest, consistent with symptom-based measures across heterogeneous samples. Functional imaging-derived phenotypes showed the strongest multivariate predictive performance. In summary, HARMONY provides a large multi-cohort resource for reproducible mental health neuroimaging research. 

2

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Introduction 

Since the introduction of neuroimaging into psychiatry, alterations in brain structure and function have been linked to symptoms of anxious misery, a construct referring to the overlap between depression and 

anxiety-related symptoms 1вҖ“5 . Landmark early findings using magnetic resonance imaging shifted depression 

research from a primary focus on neurochemistry toward neuroanatomy and distributed brain networks with 

implications for treatment 6вҖ“8 . Subsequent key findings have linked clinical depression to altered brain structure 

and function that change with treatment 9,10 . Complementary key findings have demonstrated that the 

heterogeneity of depression and anxiety forms reproducible subtypes based on functional brain circuits 11,12 . In 

younger individuals, landmark functional MRI (fMRI) connectivity findings highlight the potential to predict 

future onset of depression and allied disorders 13 . Complementary emerging approaches have integrated 

resting fMRI data across samples highlighting the power of large consortia datasets 14  and the pooling of 

structural MRI (sMRI) across multiple datasets 15 . Parallel cohort efforts have focused on using structural 

imaging to refine the diagnosis of major depression versus healthy controls 16 .

Depression and anxiety disorders are highly heterogeneous, with individuals presenting similar symptom 

profiles despite fundamentally different underlying neurobiological mechanisms 17,18 . The need to disentangle 

this neural heterogeneity was recognized in the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)вҖҷs Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) framework, which positioned the field to use a neurobiologically based framework in 

psychiatry 19 . Advances in neuroimaging have identified reproducible patterns of brain circuit dysfunction that 

capture this heterogeneity and move beyond symptom-based definitions alone 17,18 . However, translating these 

insights into broadly generalizable frameworks remains a key challenge, particularly when attempting to characterize variation across populations using diverse datasets and measurement approaches. 

The Human Connectome Project (HCP) launched in 2012 20 , was a seminal initiative using MRI to map the 

human brain at scale. HCP introduced accelerated multiband sequences for functional and diffusion MRI, 

alongside high-resolution structural imaging 21вҖ“23 . The HCP-Young Adult (HCP-YA) provided high-quality 

multimodal neuroimaging for 1200 healthy individuals, and enabled the establishment of connectome-specific processing pipelines and a high resolution вҖҳgrayordinateвҖҷ-based imaging format that captures data from 

surface-based processing 24 . Reflecting the vision of HCP, multiple connectome projects of healthy individuals 

encompassing the full lifespan were completed 25вҖ“27 . These cohorts provided a foundation for the launch of 

Connectomes Related to Human Disease (CRHD) projects in 14 disease-specific cohorts across a diverse set 

of brain disorders. Four CRHD projects, led by authors SWG, LMW, YS, and KN (Fig. 1 28 ), focused on 

depression and anxiety: Connectomes Related to Anxiety and Depression in Adolescents (HCP-ADA, also 

called BANDA; PI Whitfield-Gabrieli 29,30 ), Human Connectome Project for Disordered Emotional States 

(HCP-DES, also called STACT; PI Williams 31 ), Dimensional Connectomics of Anxious Misery (HCP-DAM, also 

called ANXPE; PI Sheline 32 ), and Perturbation of the Treatment Resistant Depression Connectome by 

Fast-acting Therapies (HCP-PDC, also called MDD; PI Narr). To align with NIMH Data Archive (NDA) naming conventions, we refer to these cohorts as HCP-BANDA, HCP-DES, HCP-DAM, and HCP-PDC throughout this manuscript. The goal of the HARMONY data resource is to combine these four CRHD cohorts related to anxious misery into a harmonized dataset for broader scale population level analyses. 

3

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 1: Overview of HARMONY dataset which represents the combination of four source Connectomes Related to Human Disease (CRHD) projects led by authors SWG, LMW, YS, and KN: Connectomes Related to Anxiety and Depression in Adolescents (HCP-ADA, 

also called BANDA; PI Whitfield-Gabrieli, Northeastern University; 29,30 ), Human Connectome Project for Disordered Emotional States, 

Stanford University (HCP-DES, also called STACT; PI Williams; 31 ), Dimensional Connectomics of Anxious Misery, University of 

Pennsylvania (HCP-DAM, also called ANXPE; PI Sheline 32 ), and Perturbation of the Treatment Resistant Depression Connectome by 

Fast-acting Therapies, UCLA (HCP-PDC, also called MDD; PI Narr). Alternative cohort names are shown based on prior literature, and the bolded names in the figure are used consistently throughout the manuscript. Building on prior efforts developed by the Connectome 

Coordination Facility 33 , Washington University in Saint Louis served as the data collation and processing center. Each dataset acquired 

multimodal neuroimaging data on (N=152-222) cases meeting criteria for anxious misery (see Methods) and on (N=49-63) healthy controls. See supplementary Table S1 and Fig. S1 for a detailed breakdown of symptom severity across CRHD cohorts and supplementary Table S2 for detailed neuroimaging acquisition protocols for each cohort. 

All four CRHD projects focused on anxious misery symptoms, each including approximately 150вҖ“220 cases (Fig. 1). Clinically, the cohorts were designed around distinct developmental stages, symptom severity, and treatment aspects. Specifically, HCP-BANDA included adolescents with anxiety and/or depressive disorders; HCP-DES aimed to recruit treatment-free young adults with significant anhedonia, anxious arousal, concentration, rumination, or tension symptoms; and HCP-DAM used a normative approach inclusion criterion based on Neuroticism scores вүҘ1 standard deviation above the control mean. In contrast, HCP-PDC is a treatment cohort focused on treatment resistant depression, including participants who had failed to respond to at least two antidepressants, were in a current depressive episode lasting at least 6 months, and had not 

received neuromodulation or ketamine within the previous 6 months 28 . Therefore, these four CRHD cohorts 

expectedly differ along the clinical spectrum of anxious misery, while collectively providing broad and complementary coverage (see Supplementary Fig. S1 for details). 

Combined and harmonized datasets are particularly valuable for enabling population-level analyses that map 

imaging features to broad symptom constructs across cohorts 43 . Efforts such as the YaleNeuroConnect 

(N=302) and the Transdiagnostic Connectome Project (N=241) datasets, and the ENIGMA MDD and 

COORDINATE MDD consortias reflect this direction 44вҖ“47 . Complementary efforts focused on standardized 

imaging of specific neural systems and defined symptoms across decades of treatment response share a related focus on accelerating reproducible imaging for clinically translatable precision medicine in mental 

health 48 . Building on prior federal and investigator investment in CRHD data acquisition, there is a clear 

opportunity to aggregate the four CRHD datasets on anxious misery into a rigorously processed resource designed for cross-cohort, data-driven association analyses. 

4

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The CRHD initiative developed common strategies for acquiring and sharing connectome neuroimaging data, 

but combining CRHD datasets still presents some challenges 49 . In addition to well-recognized site and scanner 

effects 50,51 , the four cohorts differ systematically on dimensions reflecting their original scientific objectives: 

symptom severity (highest in HCP-PDC), age range (youngest in HCP-BANDA), and the inclusion of naturalistic follow-up (HCP-BANDA, HCP-DES, HCP-DAM) or specific treatment interventions (HCP-PDC). Further heterogeneity arises from the use of partially different instruments to assess symptom severity across cohorts. Beyond these differences related to study designs and source data acquisition, practical barriers to integration remain because public distribution through the National Institute of Mental Health Data Archive (NDA) primarily provides access to unprocessed imaging data and only cohort-specific metadata. Therefore, secondary data analyses would be facilitated by sharing imaging data pre-processed with uniform pipelines, aggregate symptom and other meta-data, and harmonized imaging summary measures. Therefore, we developed the HARMONY dataset by implementing three key steps: (i) standardized HCP-style preprocessing with rigorous quality control, (ii) collation of symptom measures across cohorts, and (iii) extraction and harmonization of imaging-derived phenotypes (IDPs) 

Imaging-derived phenotypes have become a practical framework in large-scale neuroimaging resources such 

as the UK Biobank 52 . IDPs span from expert-curated summary measures to data-driven multimodal 

phenotypes. In HARMONY, we focused on widely used, interpretable IDPs with established relevance to mental health research across three imaging modalities and multiple atlases. Specifically, our IDPs cover 

regional morphology 53 , cortical thickness 54 , and myelin 55  for structural MRI (sMRI); functional amplitude 56  and 

connectivity 57  for resting-state functional MRI (rsfMRI); and diffusion-tensor white matter microstructure 58 

together with neurite-related microstructure 59  for diffusion MRI (dMRI). 

Prior multi-site neuroimaging studies have demonstrated the importance of post-acquisition harmonization to mitigate batch effects, which are scanner- and site-related variation that can confound the results and limit 

reproducibility in downstream analyses 60 . Among retrospective harmonization approaches, ComBat-based 

methods are widely used to adjust for site-related differences in mean and variance 51,61 . Extensions such as 

CovBat further account for covariance structure 62 , which is particularly relevant for multivariate analyses of 

IDPs. Incorporating generalized additive models (GAM) within this framework (e.g., ComBat-GAM and CovBat-GAM) additionally allows for flexible modeling of nonlinear biological effects, such as age, helping 

preserve meaningful brainвҖ“behavior associations across harmonized datasets 63 . To preserve symptom-related 

variance across sites, we aimed to derive the harmonization model using only the controls from each site. 

In summary, HARMONY provides a high quality HCP-style harmonized neuroimaging resource with standardized preprocessing and quality-control metrics, enabling immediate use for cross-cohort analyses of anxious misery constructs. Across the integrated dataset, the pooled cohorts offer increased statistical power for detecting subtle associations between broad brain-symptom associations, while post-acquisition harmonization procedures reduced site-related variance across all released IDPs. In proof-of-concept analyses, we observed that functional IDPs showed the strongest multivariate predictions, highlighting their utility for population-level association analyses of symptom-related variation. 

5

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Results 

HARMONY offers a shared data resource for studying neural dimensions of anxious misery. The results are split into four sections. In section 1, we present the harmonized HCP-style preprocessing pipeline that was applied to all data and report information regarding imaging data quality. In section 2, we cover the extraction of summary-level tabular IDPs from structural, diffusion, and resting state functional MRI modalities and their further harmonization (after pipeline processing). In section 3 we introduce proof-of-concept multivariate and univariate brain wide association results to demonstrate the value of the HARMONY resource for neuroimaging research in anxious misery. Lastly, in section 4 we share details on where to access the HARMONY data resource and guidance for users. 

Preprocessing and quality control of neuroimaging data 

All data were identically preprocessed on the same servers at Washington University in St Louis. An updated version of the HCP preprocessing pipeline was implemented. Briefly, this pipeline included the published 

minimal HCP preprocessing pipeline 24  implemented in QuNex 64,65  with two key extensions: (i) rigorous quality 

control of surface registration and (ii) extended fMRI preprocessing pipeline (Fig. 2). Specifically, all Freesurfer cortical ribbon extractions were manually reviewed by author ER and edited where needed (in 5.3% of participants; see Supplementary Table S3 for details). In these subjects, all subsequent preprocessing steps were repeated following manual editing of the surface. Extended fMRI preprocessing included ICA-FIX cleanup 

to remove spatially structured noise components 66,67 , cross-participant surface registration using multimodal 

surface matching (вҖҳMSMAllвҖҷ) to improve functional alignment 68,69 , вҖҳRecleanвҖҷ module designed to improve upon 

ICA-FIX classification of signal and noise components 70  and temporal ICA cleanup to remove unstructured 

noise components 71 .

Figure 2: Flowchart overview of HARMONY processing pipeline. Names in the preprocessing pipeline on the left refer to 

modules in QuNex 72 . More information on IDP extraction and atlases can be found below. HCP = Human Connectome 

Project; QC = quality control; ICA = independent component analysis; MSM = multimodal surface matching; TICA = temporal ICA; DKT = Desikan-Killiany-Tourville; MMP = multimodal parcellation; ASEG = Automatic subcortical segmentation; JHU = Johns Hopkins University. 

6

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

For quality control (QC), we evaluated signal-based and motion-related metrics, along with additional modality-specific measures, across all three imaging modalities. QC profiles across cohorts are shown in Fig. 3, with some expected variation in signal-based metrics. For example, HCP-DES showed higher signal-based metrics for sMRI and fMRI yet lower metrics for dMRI, which can be influenced by the difference in MRI hardware and acquisition protocols (see Supplementary Table S2). Case-control comparisons were performed for all QC measures separately per site. Although some QC differences between cases and controls were observed (Supplementary Table S4), these were not consistent across modalities or across sites. The total number of ICA components was higher in the HCP-BANDA adolescent dataset than in the three adult datasets 

(Supplementary Fig. S2) as is commonly observed in younger cohorts 73 , but the ratio of noise to total ICA 

components was stable across datasets such that data quality of post-processed data is not expected to differ from the adult cohorts. Although the extended вҖҳRecleanвҖҷ pipeline step had minimal impact on most datasets, it resulted in reclassification of some components in the HCP-DES dataset (Supplementary Fig. S2). Subject specific quality control information for all measures are included in the HARMONY data resource to enable users to set study-specific QC-based inclusion/exclusion thresholds. 

Figure 3: Quality control results on HARMONY data. For T1-weighted scans, the contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) achieves scores above 2 for all HARMONY participants (a). For diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), effective signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is reported for both b=0 (b) and b=1500 s/mm 2 volumes (c). For rsfMRI, temporal signal-to-noise ratio (tSNR) is reported averaged across the grayordinates (d) and on the brain surface (e) for each CRHD cohort. Furthermore, DVARS (i.e., the root mean square of the temporal derivative) calculated from rsfMRI data and standardized with individual global signals is shown in the bottom right (f). Results in this figure are based on both cases and controls. Case-control comparisons for key QC measures can be found in Supplementary Table S4 and additional ICA-based QC measures for resting state fMRI and registration-based QC measures are shown in Supplementary Fig. S2. 

7

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Extraction and harmonization of Imaging Derived Phenotypes (IDPs) 

Following preprocessing and quality control, we extracted a total of 6 families of IDPs (2 families from each imaging modality; sMRI, rfMRI, and dMRI) with 13 unique IDP types across multiple atlases (Table 1). Briefly, IDP types from structural T1-weighted MRI included gray matter volumes, cortical thickness, and myelin estimated from the T1w/T2w ratio at the regional level using several different atlases (DKT & HCP-MMP1.0 for 

cortical areas and ASEG for subcortical regions 74,75 ). IDP types from dMRI included both image-level and 

tract-level for fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity, and neurite-related white matter microstructures. For rsfMRI, we included ROI- and network-based parcellations, covering both low and high feature dimensions, to enable systematic evaluation at the level of aggregated networks and cortical regions. Specifically, IDP types from rsfMRI included amplitudes (temporal standard deviation), full correlation connectivity, and partial correlation connectivity for two different atlases (ICA-25 covering large-scale networks and HCP-MMP1.0 covering 360 cortical areas combined with 19 subcortical regions from the ASEG atlas). Partial correlation connectivity was also calculated after combining bilateral homologues from the HCP-MMP-1.0 atlas to avoid overcorrection for bilateral synchrony. In summary, these IDP types comprise region-level tabulated summary 

measures and were selected to align with IDP families available in other large-scale datasets 76 . For each of the 

13 IDP types covering all three imaging modalities, we selected a representative atlas as a focus for all subsequent analysis. The selected atlases for each IDP type are highlighted with ( d) in Table 1. 

Table 1: HARMONY Imaging Derived Phenotypes (IDP) 

IDP family  IDP type  Atlas  IDP measures                        

> Number of used features
> Brain Morphometry
> Gray matter volume
> Desikan-Killiany-Tourville (DKT) cortical_volume_DKT 63
> HCP-MMP1.0 (Glasser) cortical_volume_HCP-MMP 360
> HCP-MMP1.0 and 19 Freesurfer Subcortical Segmentation ASEG (HCP2016FS) volume_HCP2016FS d379 b
> Freesurfer Subcortical Segmentation
> (ASEG, 19 regions)
> subcortical_volume_FS 19 a
> Cortical thickness
> Desikan-Killiany-Tourville (DKT) cortical_thickness_DKT 63
> HCP-MMP1.0 (Glasser) cortical_thickness_HCP-MMP d360
> Myelin Cortical myelin HCP-MMP1.0 (Glasser) cortical_myelin_HCP-MMP d360
> Functional Amplitude
> Functional amplitude
> HCP-MMP1.0 and 19 ASEG (HCP2016FS) amp_HCP2016FS d379
> HCP-YA-derived 25 Independent Component Analysis (ICA25)
> amp_ICA25 25
> HCP-YA-derived 200 Independent Component Analysis (ICA200)
> amp_ICA200 200
> Functional Connectivity
> Full connectivity
> HCP-MMP1.0 and 19 ASEG (HCP2016FS) full_corr_HCP2016FS 71,631 c
> HCP-YA-derived 25 Independent Component Analysis (ICA25)
> full_corr_ICA25 d300 c
> HCP-YA-derived 200 Independent Component Analysis (ICA200)
> full_corr_ICA200 19,900 c

8

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Bilateralized full connectivity 

HCP-MMP1.0 and 19 ASEG (HCP2016FS)  bilat_full_corr_HCP2016FS d 17,955 c

Partial connectivity 

HCP-MMP1.0 and 19 ASEG (HCP2016FS)  partial_corr_HCP2016FS  71,631 c

HCP-YA-derived 25 Independent Component Analysis (ICA25) 

partial_corr_ICA25 d 300 c

HCP-YA-derived 200 Independent Component Analysis (ICA200) 

partial_corr_ICA200  19,900 c

Bilateralized partial connectivity 

HCP-MMP1.0 and 19 ASEG (HCP2016FS)  bilat_partial_corr_HCP2016FS d 17,955 c

Diffusion-tensor white matter microstructure 

Fractional anisotropy 

(FA) 

Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

fa_JHU81  48 

HARMONY-derived skeleton with Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

skeleton_fa_JHU81 d 48 

Mean diffusivity 

(MD) 

Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

md_JHU81  48 

HARMONY-derived skeleton with Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

skeleton_md_JHU81 d 48 

Neurite-related 

white matter microstructure 

Neurite density index (NDI) 

Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

ndi_JHU81  48 

HARMONY-derived skeleton with Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

skeleton_ndi_JHU81 d 48 

Orientation dispersion index (ODI) 

Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

odi_JHU81  48 

HARMONY-derived skeleton with Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

skeleton_odi_JHU81 d 48 

Isotropic volume fraction (IVF) 

Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

ivf_JHU81  48 

HARMONY-derived skeleton with Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU-81) 

skeleton_ivf_JHU81 d 48 

Table 1: Imaging derived phenotypes (IDPs) capture tabulated summary information regarding brain structure and function for parcellated brain regions. The HARMONY data resource includes 6 IDP families (2 per modality), split into 13 IDP types across separate file names and atlases. Some individual IDP features were excluded from the association analyses below to a focus on gray matter regional correlates of depression (see right-most column). Specifically, a indicates that non gray-matter segmentation volume and total intracranial volume (eTIV) IDP features were excluded; b indicates that non-neural structures from ASEG atlas including ventricle, CSF, vessels, corpus callosum, cerebellar white matter, and global measures (such as cortex volume, eTIV, segmentation volume, surface holes, etc) were excluded; c indicates that redundant functional connectivity (upper triangle and diagonal of connectivity matrix) was excluded. Notably, these features are available as part of the HARMONY data resource. From each of the 13 IDP types, we selected one atlas as representative feature sets for subsequent analyses marked as d in the column titled вҖҳIDP fileвҖҷ. 

9

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint Although all image acquisition sequences were inspired by HCP-style protocols, site effects may arise from scanner model, acquisition-parameter differences, and other site-specific factors, even when protocols are closely matched (Supplementary Table S2). To account for these effects, we conducted IDP harmonization 

using ComBat-GAM 63  and CovBat-GAM 77 . The current implementation of ComBat-GAM allows for training on 

controls only and applying the trained adjustments to cases 78 , which is important given that symptom severity 

systematically differed between sites. CovBat-GAM does not currently have this functionality, and we therefore included a measure of anhedonia as a covariate in the implementation of CovBat-GAM in order to retain variance related to affective symptoms during the CovBat-GAM harmonization. The impact of IDP harmonization was assessed using site classification accuracy based on multiclass support vector machines and illustrated by association curves between gray matter volume and age. Notably, low accuracy in site classification is desirable as it indicates successful harmonization. 

Qualitatively, the associations between age and overall gray matter volume showed undesired offsets between cohorts prior to harmonization (Fig. 4a) that were effectively removed by applying CovBat-GAM (Fig. 4b), and ComBat-GAM (Fig 4c). As expected, site classification was significantly higher than chance in both cases and controls for all unharmonized IDPs (Fig. 4d-e; Supplementary Fig. S3). After applying CovBat-GAM and ComBat-GAM, site-related effects in the IDPs were attenuated in the control group, as reflected by a marked reduction in site-prediction accuracy (Unharmonized: 77%; CovBat-GAM: 38%; ComBat-GAM (fit on controls): 31%; Fig. 4). In contrast, the attenuation of site classification accuracy for cases showed greater differences between ComBat-GAM (fit on controls) and CovBat-GAM. Specifically, in cases ComBat-GAM resulted in a site classification accuracy of 71%, whereas accuracy in CovBat-GAM was lower at 38% (compared to 83% prior to harmonization). Importantly, the intention of harmonization is to remove site effects while retaining meaningful individual differences. As such, the ComBat-GAM pattern of low site classification accuracy in controls yet high site classification accuracy in cases suggests that, in the case group, site-related differences are partially confounded with clinical differences across cohorts. Although we included severity as a covariate to preserve in CovBat-GAM, our findings demonstrate that the inclusion of patients in the model may nevertheless result in over-correction. On the other hand, training ComBat-GAM on controls and applying the estimated adjustments to cases may preserve clinically relevant signals, and therefore does not minimize site classification accuracy among cases due to overlap with a possible anhedonia effect. The effects of ComBat-GAM versus CovBat-GAM were assessed further in the context of brain-symptom associations as described below. 

10 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4: Harmonization strategies were illustrated by the relationship with principal component 1 (PC1) of gray matter volume as a function of age for unharmonized (a), CovBat-GAM (b), and ComBat-GAM (c). Specifically, only cases were illustrated and age was modeled using a B-spline basis with 5 degrees of freedom and cubic spline, and PC1 was regressed on this spline basis using ordinary least squares. 95% confidence intervals were obtained from the model for each cohort: HCP-BANDA (yellow), HCP-DES (orange), HCP-DAM (ruby), and HCP-PDC (purple). Moreover, IDP site effects were evaluated by cross-validated SVM site classification before and after harmonization (lower accuracies reflect greater site-correction). Balanced accuracy was estimated using PCA (k=25) with 100 repeated 5-fold cross-validation. Results showed effective harmonization (i.e., removal of site classification accuracy) for both ComBat-GAM (fit on controls) and CovBat-GAM in controls (gray) for three selected IDPs: gray matter volume (d) partial connectivity ICA25 (e), and skeletonized fractional anisotropy (f). Elevated site classification accuracy in ComBat-GAM (fit on controls) for cases only (red) was presumably driven by systematic differences in psychopathology across sites, reflecting retention of true site differences that are of interest. The dashed line indicates chance-level balanced accuracy. Here, and in the other figures, the black vertical bars in the distribution plots indicate the interquartile range and the black horizontal bars indicate the median. 

11 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Brain-symptom associations 

To provide a proof-of-concept analysis of brainвҖ“behavior associations in the HARMONY dataset, we quantified associations between 13 selected IDPs and (i) anhedonia (measured using the Snaith-Hamilton pleasure scale 

(SHAPS) 79 ) and (ii) depression severity (measured using the Hamilton depression rating scale (HAMD) 80 ). 

Anhedonia analyses included all four cohorts, whereas depression severity analyses excluded HCP-BANDA because HAMD was not acquired in this cohort. Only cases were included for subsequent analyses. Multivariate prediction analyses involved principal component regression (PCR) with 100 repeats of 5-fold cross-validation (with PCA and covariate regression performed within folds to avoid leakage). Here, PCR was chosen to match the input dimensionality across all IDPs, and the size of the reduced feature space was set to k=25 to match our smallest IDP feature set. Univariate analyses involved separate partial correlation per feature, adjusted by age and sex, followed by false discovery rate correction for multiple comparisons within each IDP. 

Across 13 selected IDP measures, ComBat-GAM achieved significant cross-validated R 2 for the prediction of anhedonia scores when using structural and functional IDPs, but not for diffusion IDPs (Fig. 5 and Supplementary Fig. S4). When comparing multivariate predictive performance as a function of harmonization approaches, ComBat-GAM (fit on controls) consistently outperformed CovBat-GAM (Fig. 5). These results suggest that relatively more variance relevant to affective symptoms was retained when training on healthy controls only and applying to cases. This feature is currently only implemented in ComBat-GAM, and we anticipate improved results for CovBat-GAM harmonization once the same approach can be applied. Accordingly, we used ComBat-GAMвҖ“harmonized IDPs for subsequent univariate analyses. Prediction accuracy also varied across IDP types (Fig. 5b). 

12 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5: Multivariate brain-symptom association results. Principal component regression (k=25) with 100 repeated 5-fold cross-validation were performed after adjusting for age and sex at feature level. (a) Out of the 13 IDP types (with one pre-selected atlas per type), R 2 was higher for ComBat-GAM (fit on controls) than for CovBat-GAM in almost all analyses (12 out of 13 for anhedonia, and 11 out of 13 for depression severity). Bars show the difference in R2, with positive values indicating higher R 2 for ComBat-GAM (fit on controls), and error bars show the standard error of mean. (b) Out of 13 IDP types (with one pre-selected atlas per type), bilateralized functional connectivity achieved the highest R 2 for anhedonia (orange) but showed no significant effect for depression severity (purple) prediction. Distributions in (b) represent the variation across 100 repetitions of 5-fold cross-validation (with R 2 averaged across folds within a repetition). Note that R 2

is calculated from the sum squared error (rather than the squared correlation) and can therefore take on negative values indicative of poor model performance. The asterisks refer to significant predictions (p < 0.05) calculated from a corrected 

resampled StudentвҖҷs t-test against zero 118 . Anhedonia results (orange) included all 4 cohorts and depression results 

(purple) included only the 3 adult cohorts because HAMD was not available in HCP-BANDA. Results in this figure are based on cases only. 

To assess the value of the combined HARMONY dataset compared to individual cohorts, we compared model performance when training and testing models in each separate dataset to the performance when training and testing models on the aggregated HARMONY dataset. As performance metrics, we used overall prediction accuracy and the gap between training and testing R 2 values (i.e., an indicator of the improved cross-validated generalizability reflected by reduced overfitting of estimates). Cross-validated R 2 prediction accuracy for anhedonia reached significance for the HARMONY dataset вҖ“ but not for individual cohorts вҖ“ when trained on gray matter volume and functional partial connectivity IDPs (Fig. 6a-b), but not diffusion IDP (fractional anisotropy; Fig. 6c). In addition to significant cross-validated prediction performance, the gap between training and test accuracy was substantially lower in the HARMONY dataset compared to individual cohorts (Fig. 6d), indicating improved performance and cross-validated generalizability in the combined dataset. Repeating the analyses in Fig. 6 after mixing subjects across cohorts revealed that both the prediction accuracy and train-test gap advantage of HARMONY was explained by increased sample size, rather than cohort mixing (Supplementary Fig. S5). 

13 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 6: Comparison of multivariate brainвҖ“symptom models trained either on separate CRHD cohorts or on the combined HARMONY dataset for three ComBat-GAM-harmonized IDPs, including gray matter volume (a), partial connectivity (b) and fractional anisotropy (c). Prediction gaps (train R 2 - test R 2) were calculated for each of 100 repetitions, and averaged across the three selected IDPs shown in a, b, and c (d). Error bars indicate standard errors of mean across 300 datapoints (3 IDPs x 100 repetitions each). Results indicated reducing overfitting to testing data, reflected by smaller prediction gaps between train and test splits for the combined dataset relative to the individual cohorts. Anhedonia results (orange) were available for all 4 cohorts and depression severity results (purple) were not available in HCP-BANDA. Results in this figure are based on cases only. 

For univariate results, we focused on associations of anhedonia and depression severity, with three ComBat-GAM-harmonized IDPs representative of structural, functional, and diffusion modalities. Out of 379 gray matter volume IDP features, 36 IDP features passed false discovery rate (FDR) correction in relation to anhedonia (Fig. 7a). Specifically, significant gray matter volume reductions associated with anhedonia were observed in both left and right hemispheres spanning frontal, middle temporal, and parietal regions. Notably, cingulate involvement was also present in classic emotion-related circuits, including anterior/mid cingulate and posterior cingulate/retrosplenial regions. Within significant features, two left cortical and one subcortical regions showed positive associations (including left lateral occipital, left parieto-occipital sulcus, and right ventral diencephalon). Effect sizes were generally modest, with an average correlation of r = -0.12 among negative associations. On the other hand, none of the depression severity associations passed FDR correction after controlling for age and sex. The regions with p < 0.05 uncorrected are shown in gray in Fig. 7b. 

For rsfMRI, the low-dimensional representation of 25-dimensional ICA enabled interpretability of partial functional connectivity. The results showed both positive and negative associations with anhedonia (Fig. 7c) with the average absolute magnitude around 0.15 across 11 significant FDR-corrected edges. Using the 25-component sICA decomposition (see Supplementary Fig. S6a for template ICA maps), negative associations with anhedonia were primarily observed among connections between default-mode network, fronto-parietal network, temporo-parietal junction, visual network, thalamus, precuneus, caudate nucleus and cerebellum while positive association with anhedonia were observed in among visual network, temporo-parietal junction and cerebellar connections. On the other hand, depression severity showed average absolute magnitude around 0.14 across 11 significant FDR-corrected edges (Fig. 7d). Six positive associations were observed among fronto-parietal network, tempero-parietal junction, somatosensory network, visual network, caudate nucleus and cerebellar connections, while five negative associations primarily observed among default-mode network, fronto-parietal network, tempero-parietal junction, visual network, precuneus, cerebellum and brain stem connections. 

For dMRI, higher anhedonia was associated with lower fractional anisotropy in the splenium of the corpus callosum (r=-0.12, p fdr = 0.027) and higher fractional anisotropy in the fornix (r=0.11, p fdr = 0.027). Depression severity showed no significant dMRI associations after correction (see Supplementary Fig. S6b for template skeleton map). 

14 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 7: Univariate associations between imaging phenotypes and anhedonia (left column) or depression severity (right column). Effect sizes of gray matter volume with anhedonia (a) and depression severity (b) were estimated by partial correlation (regressed out age and sex) with Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR). Regions with p fdr < 0.05 are plotted in color either purple (negative association) or yellow (positive association), while regions with p < 0.05 uncorrected are shown in gray. Chord diagrams were visualized for association between partial functional connectivity (ICA25) with anhedonia (c) and depression severity (d). FMRIB58 was used as a template to project relationships between fractional anisotropy (skeleton JHU81) and depression (e) or anhedonia (f). Results in this figure are based on cases only. 

15 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Data sharing 

The HARMONY data resource will shortly be available for download at the NDA and at BALSA. The data resource includes easily accessible tabulated data covering multimodal IDPs (Table 1), symptom data, demographics, quantitative QC metrics, and a data dictionary. 

Data access steps are akin to HCP-YA access and require all users to agree to Data Use Terms. Although the HARMONY data is deidentified, combinations of variables could be potentially reidentifying. As such, it is important that users consult with an Institutional Review Board or Ethics Committee before beginning the research to ensure that appropriate approvals/exemptions are in place. 

Tabulated data are shared for all participants for whom processing pipelines reached completion. Future studies using the data resource may wish to leverage QC metrics to exclude participants with noisy data, while 

assessing and balancing the risk of bias 81 . To this end, we have shared tabulated subject-level information on 

all QC measures described above. We elected to share вҖҳrawвҖҷ (unharmonized) IDPs and ComBat-GAM (fit on controls) harmonized IDPs. The corresponding scripts were also provided, allowing users to rerun the harmonization pipeline and modify the hyperparameters as needed for CovBat-GAM harmonization and their own specific analyses. 

16 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Discussion 

HARMONY was developed to support robust and reproducible neuroimaging research on anxious misery by integrating multiple state-of-the-art HCP-style cohorts into a single, harmonized, multimodal resource. Large-scale harmonized neuroimaging initiatives have demonstrated transformative impact across the full 

research landscape from standardizing acquisition and preprocessing 85 , to enabling disease-focused discovery 

and benchmarking 86вҖ“88  and linking brain measures to genetics 89вҖ“91 . Large scale datasets also provide the 

sample sizes required for modern data-driven approaches, including machine learning and deep learning, 

where model robustness improves with larger, diverse, and well-curated data 92,93 . In this context, HARMONY 

extends these big data advantages to anxious misery research. 

Importantly, our findings showed that pooling harmonized datasets improved statistical power for detecting subtle effects in the neurobiological correlates of anxious misery. Effect sizes were larger in the combined HARMONY dataset compared to the individual cohorts, with improved generalizability to unseen data and improved statistical power. Importantly, HARMONY offers a clinically curated and diagnostically stratified sample that has been phenotyped using robust clinician-rated instruments (e.g., HAMD), offering rich 

opportunities for research into heterogeneity and subtypes of anxious misery 11 .

When combining multiple datasets, a key challenge is to implement appropriate control for site differences, while retaining effects of interest. Our findings showed that both ComBat-GAM (fit on controls) and CovBat-GAM successfully reduced site effects across all released IDPs. Importantly, the severity of mental health symptomatology varied systematically across HARMONY sites, which may lead to the attenuation of 

severity effects after harmonization if not carefully handled 94,95 . To avoid unintentional removal of severity 

effects, we compared (i) the CovBat-GAM approach 62  used in a prior data resource 77  and implemented to retain 

variance linked to covariates of interest (here age, sex, and SHAPS) 63  with (ii) an approach, ComBat-GAM, 

that can be trained on just healthy controls, with the estimated site adjustments then applied to the вҖңunseenвҖқ case data. Our findings revealed stronger associations between IDPs and anhedonia after the ComBat-GAM harmonization (fit on controls), with appropriately attenuated site effects in controls. Notably, site effects were not fully removed among cases following ComBat-GAM, likely reflecting true site-related differences in the severity of anxious misery symptoms. These results reveal the tension between desirable site correction and undesirable removal of effects of interest. Notably, functionality to train CovBat-GAM on controls and apply to unseen case data is underway at the time of writing. Once available, this and other harmonization techniques that enable control-only fitting may be suitable for further exploration in the HARMONY data resource. 

In terms of brain-behavior associations in the anxious misery domain, our findings demonstrated that functional IDPs achieved the strongest multivariate predictive performance across the three imaging modalities and across IDP families. Recent benchmarking work suggests that properties of resting-state connectivity maps depend strongly on the chosen connectivity metric, with partial connectivity achieving stronger individual 

fingerprint predictability and higher mental health predictability compared with standard full connectivity 96 .

Furthermore, partial connectivity achieves improved correspondence between structural and functional 

connectivity as compared to full connectivity 97 . As such, partial functional connectivity IDPs offer a particularly 

promising representation for future transdiagnostic prediction and biomarker-oriented analyses. 

In addition to its strengths, including a harmonized sample of 743 individuals with anxious misery spanning a broad age range and symptom severity range, several limitations should be considered when interpreting the HARMONY resource. First, although all four CRHD cohorts acquired extensive batteries to characterize 

anxious misery symptomatology 28  only HAMD and SHAPS were consistently available across (adult) cohorts. 

17 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

This constrains the range and specificity of harmonized symptom domains, which are necessarily reduced to constructs that can be aligned across datasets. Future work may extend this by integrating partially overlapping instruments through data-driven or latent variable approaches. Second, although quality-control (QC) profiles are provided, variability in data quality remains an important consideration, particularly given its 

influence on brain-behavior associations 98,99 . Further work could incorporate more advanced QC metrics and 

systematically evaluate the impact of subject-level exclusion thresholds on downstream analyses 81,100 , as well 

as the role of natural quality variation relevant to future clinical translation in real-world settings that use standardized QC routines. Third, the interpretation of brainвҖ“symptom associations in large-scale datasets depends critically on the nature of the sampled variation. Analyses that span broad ranges of symptom severity, including subclinical levels, may capture low-dimensional or global patterns of variation but may also 

dilute associations that are more specific to stratified subgroups or higher severity presentations 15,47,101,102 .

Although HARMONY represents an advance over general population datasets through its focus on samples specifically recruited for active symptomatology, the distribution of severity remains predominantly in the mild-to-moderate range. These considerations highlight both the strengths and the appropriate scope of the HARMONY resource: it is well suited to population-level, cross-cohort analyses of broad brainвҖ“behavior associations, while complementary approaches that more directly parse heterogeneityвҖ”through targeted phenotyping, subgroup identification, or specific circuit-informed measuresвҖ”will be important for resolving more specific and clinically relevant patterns of brain dysfunction. 

In summary, we developed the HARMONY resource by harmonizing four CRHD datasets through standardized HCP-style preprocessing, rigorous quality control, and the systematic extraction and integration of imaging derived phenotypes and symptom measures. HARMONY is designed to support reproducible, cross-cohort investigation of brain-behavior relationships in anxious misery, particularly through data-driven analyses of population-level variation. We anticipate that this resource will facilitate studies of heterogeneity, subgroup stratification, dimensional symptom variation, and lifespan effects, providing a foundation for more targeted investigations of brain circuit function in depression and anxiety. 

18 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Methods 

Participants 

Secondary data were aggregated from four CRHD cohorts that acquired multimodal HCP-style protocols and 

shared de-identified imaging, clinical and behavioral data 28 . HCP-BANDA included 152 adolescents aged 

14вҖ“17 years, including youth with a diagnosis of depression and/or anxiety. HCP-DES included 222 symptomatic, untreated young adults aged 18вҖ“36 years; clinical inclusion required clinically significant anhedonia, anxious arousal, concentration difficulties, rumination, or tension. HCP-DAM included 197 participants with anxious misery symptoms, with an inclusion criterion of neuroticism вүҘ1 standard deviation above the mean of controls. Finally, HCP-PDC comprised 172 adults aged 20вҖ“76 years with major depressive disorder who failed to respond to at least two antidepressants, with no neuromodulation or ketamine within the previous 6 months. All sites included healthy controls (N=49-63 additional per site) who did not meet DSM-5 criteria for psychiatric disorders (See Supplementary Table S1 for a detailed breakdown of cohort characteristics). 

Longitudinal designs 

While this study focuses mainly on baseline characteristics with available neuroimaging data, all four CRHD included a follow-up component, which involved non-imaging measurements for HCP-BANDA,HCP-DES, and HCP-DAM, and a full protocol repeat following treatment interventions for HCP-PDC. More information on longitudinal designs is provided in the supplementary information. IDPs derived from follow-up imaging sessions are included in the data release. 

Collation of demographic and symptom data 

To collate non-imaging data across HARMONY sites, we first isolated and formatted each instrument into a stand alone comma-separated values (CSV) file mapped to an NIMH Data Archive (NDA) вҖңstructureвҖқ wherever possible (typically but not always 1:1 at the instrument level). These files served as the basis for a harmonized cross-site data dictionary, which we developed in several stages. First, we identified instruments with differing 

or missing names and descriptions (e.g., hrds01 and hamd01 both representing the HAMD 80 ), and linked 

instruments using a common shortname ( hamd01 ) and instrument label. Next, we isolated and harmonized key demographic variables (age, sex, race, ethnicity, adapted GUID, collection date) using NDA dictionary definitions (e.g., age recorded in months rather than years). We then removed housekeeping or redundant variables (e.g., form_complete fields and duplicate subject identifiers) and merged MR session identifiers. 

We additionally harmonized identically collected variables with different names by creating and storing explicit rename maps. Because behavioral assessments were often collected across multiple adjacent days, the 

interview_date could differ across components, producing multiple sparse records per participant. We distinguished scientifically meaningful longitudinal spacing (e.g., quarterly visits and pre-post treatment visits) from practical scheduling windows (e.g., 2вҖ“3 adjacent days) and collapsed multi-day records into a single visit aligned to the imaging session where appropriate, using the earliest date as the visit date. 

We then conducted targeted checks for common issues encountered when integrating behavioral and clinical measures across cohorts, including (i) inconsistent scale coding (e.g., Likert scales coded 0вҖ“4 vs. 1вҖ“5), (ii) reverse coding (0вҖ“4 vs. 4вҖ“0), (iii) differences in summary-score computation, (iv) differences in missing-value encodings, and (v) distributional shifts indicative of procedural or platform changes or cohort differences. The resulting shared HARMONY data resource includes core demographic variables (age, sex, race, ethnicity, 

19 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

collection data) and symptom data leveraged in this study (case/ control status, HAMD, and Snaith-Hamilton 

Anhedonia Scale (SHAPS) 79 ). 

SHAPS and HAMD had different levels of missingness across cases and controls. Among cases (n = 743), SHAPS was available for 698 participants and missing for 45 participants (6.1% missing), while HAMD was available for 523 participants and missing for 68 participants (11.56% missing from 3 available datasets). Among controls (n = 220), SHAPS was available for 207 participants and missing for 13 participants (5.9% missing), while HAMD was available for 131 participants and missing for 26 participants (16.56% missing). At the site level, SHAPS missingness among cases was highest in HCP-DAM (37/197; 18.8%), followed by HCP-BANDA (4/152; 2.6%) and HCP-PDC (4/172; 2.3%), with no missing SHAPS data in HCP-DES cases. For HAMD, missingness among cases was highest in HCP-DAM (39/197; 19.8%), followed by HCP-DES (27/222; 12.2%) and HCP-PDC (2/172; 1.2%). 

MRI acquisition 

MRI acquisitions were designed to follow the HCP-style protocols, with three studies acquired on 3T Siemens Prisma systems (HCP-BANDA, HCP-DAM, HCP-PDC) and one on 3T GE Discovery MR750 or UHP (HCP-DES), using high-density receive-array head coils and comparable sequence timing overall. Full acquisition parameters are available in Supplementary Table S2, and cross-site comparisons are described in 

detail by Tozzi et al 28 . In brief, all studies collected high-resolution 0.8 mm isotropic 3D T1w and T2w scans 

with similar field-of-view and contrast settings. For both fMRI and dMRI, the EPI acquisitions included runs with both вҖңAPвҖқ and вҖңPAвҖқ phase encoding polarity, with AP/PA pairs of spin-echo EPI images also acquired to support susceptibility distortion correction. Resting-state fMRI used highly accelerated multiband EPI (TR = 0.8 s for Siemens; 0.71 s for GE), but HCP-DES differed by using MB=6 (vs MB=8) and 2.4 mm voxels (vs 2.0 mm). Diffusion MRI was similarly harmonized across sites using multi-shell b=1500/3000 s/mmВІ protocols (MB=4 with 1.5 mm isotropic voxels), although HCP-DES acquired fewer directions per shell (75/75 vs 92/93 for the Siemens cohorts). Total duration of the resting-state scans varied by project, with HCP-DES/DAM/BANDA acquiring ~20 minutes per session, whereas HCP-PDC acquired ~12 minutes per session. 

Image preprocessing 

All datasets were processed using the HCP Pipelines as implemented in the QuNex container (see 

Supplementary Table S5) 24,64,65 . For structural and functional MRI, the minimal preprocessing workflow included 

PreFreeSurfer, FreeSurfer, and PostFreeSurfer for anatomical reconstruction and surface generation, followed by fMRIVolume and fMRISurface for resting-state fMRI preprocessing projected to CIFTI grayordinates space. Surface-based registration quality was assessed by manual review of cortical surface placement and вҖңmyelin mapвҖқ quality, and scans were flagged for reprocessing when clear surface or registration imperfections were qualitatively observed (Supplementary Table S3). Cortical myelin estimates were derived from the transmit 

fieldвҖ“corrected T1w/T2w maps to mitigate spatial bias from B1+ transmit inhomogeneity 103 .

For resting-state fMRI, an extended denoising pipeline was applied to improve artifact removal beyond minimal preprocessing. This included spatial ICA with FIX for automated component classification and removal of 

structured noise 67 . We additionally applied вҖҳRecleanвҖҷ (recleaning) to refine ICA-based classification by 

re-evaluating components assignment and improving noise identification 70 . Finally, вҖҳTcleanвҖҷ (temporal ICA; 

tICA) was used to remove global and temporally structured artifacts while preserving neural signals 71,104 .

Surface alignment across subjects was performed using multimodal areal-feature-based registration (вҖҳMSMAllвҖҷ) 

to improve correspondence of cortical areas 69 .

20 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

For diffusion MRI, data were processed using the HCP diffusion preprocessing workflow, including 

susceptibility-induced distortion correction using TOPUP and eddy-current correction using EDDY 105 , with 

rotation of diffusion gradient directions, outlier replacement (with --ol_nstd =5) 106 ,

movement-by-susceptibility correction 107 , and slice-to-volume (S2V) movement correction 108 . S2V was not 

included for HCP-DES, since the necessary slice-timing information of the General Electric multiband implementation was not available. 

Quality control measures 

In addition to manual QC, we quantified signal-based and motion-related metrics, together with modality-specific QC measures, to provide a holistic view of neuroimaging data quality. Signal-based QC included contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) for T1w (computed with Freesurfer), temporal signal-to-noise ratio (tSNR) for blood-oxygenation-levelвҖ“dependent (BOLD) echo planar imaging (EPI), which was computed using FSL tools (e.g., fslmaths and fslstats), and SNR/CNR reported by QUAD for diffusion weighted imaging 

(DWI) 109 . Specifically, FreeSurferвҖҷs вҖҳmri_cnrвҖҷ was used to estimate structural CNR by sampling intensities 

around the cortical surface (white matter, cortical gray matter, and CSF) and computing an averaged tissue contrast-to-noise measure (primarily grayвҖ“white and grayвҖ“CSF contrast terms) reflecting local tissue-intensity variability rather than image background. 

For resting-state fMRI, tSNR was computed at each grayordinate/voxel as: 

рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ғрқ‘… = Ојрқ‘Ў 

> Пғрқ‘Ў

where Ој t is the mean signal across time and Пғ t is the standard deviation across time; the resulting tSNR map was then averaged across grayordinates/voxels to obtain subject-level summary values. In addition to the signal-based metrics, we quantified the root mean square of the temporal derivative (DVARS) as amotion-related QC metric, reflecting frame-to-frame changes in whole-brain BOLD signal intensity that are 

often associated with head motion and other transient non-neural artifacts 110 .

For DWI, we used QUAD-reported SNR/CNR summary metrics from the FSL вҖҳeddyвҖҷ QC pipeline, where an SNR map was computed from the b=0 volumes, and CNR maps were calculated for each of the diffusion-weighted shells (b= 1500 and 3000 s/mm 2) as follows: 

рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ғрқ‘… =

> Ојрқ‘Ҹ0
> Пғрқ‘Ҹ0

рқҗ¶рқ‘Ғрқ‘… = Пғрқҗәрқ‘Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ рқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘қрқ‘ҹрқ‘ңрқ‘җрқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘ вҲ’рқ‘қрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘җрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘ңрқ‘ӣ 

> Пғрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘–рқ‘‘рқ‘ўрқ‘Һрқ‘ҷ

The average SNR/CNR within each map was then computed as the average within a brain mask. To improve comparability across broader datasets with different spatial resolution and scan lengths, for the DWI data we additionally report SNR effective , CNR effective metrics normalized for differences in voxel size and the number of 

volumes 109 :

рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ғрқ‘… рқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“рқ‘’рқ‘җрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘Јрқ‘’ = рқ‘Ҷрқ‘Ғрқ‘… Г— рқ‘Ғ рқ‘Ҹ=0 

> рқ‘ү рқ‘Јрқ‘ңрқ‘Ҙрқ‘’рқ‘ҷ

21 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

рқҗ¶рқ‘Ғрқ‘… рқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“рқ‘’рқ‘җрқ‘Ўрқ‘–рқ‘Јрқ‘’ = рқҗ¶рқ‘Ғрқ‘… Г— рқ‘Ғ рқ‘Ҹ=1500,3000 

> рқ‘ү рқ‘Јрқ‘ңрқ‘Ҙрқ‘’рқ‘ҷ

Additional QC measures included registration performance indexed by the вҖҳmincostвҖҷ value returned by 

Boundary-Based Registration (BBR) 111 , as well as ICA-derived component summaries (noise, signal, and total 

component counts) before and after the Reclean reclassification step (see Supplementary Fig. S2). Notably, the mincost values are useful to identify outliers within a consistently acquired dataset, but are not normalized for comparison across datasets. The ICA component summaries provide an overview of the total number of components (which tends to be higher in noisier data) and the ratio of noise-labeled components to the total number of components. These QC outputs will be shared alongside the harmonized IDPs to support transparency and secondary analyses. 

Imaging Derived Phenotype (IDP) extraction 

To support broad reuse of the HARMONY data resource, we extracted a set of IDP families spanning structural, functional, and diffusion modalities. Since neuroimaging features can range from low-dimensional to very high-dimensional representations (d), we intentionally included both lower- and higher-dimensional atlases to enable dimensionality comparisons. This design supports evaluation of how feature dimensionality influences model stability, interpretability, and generalizability. 

Structural MRI IDPs 

For structural MRI, we extracted T1w-derived regional volumes, cortical thickness, and T1w/T2w ratio derived 

cortical myelin 55,103 . Cortical and subcortical morphology measures were derived from the HCP structural 

pipelines and summarized using standard FreeSurfer parcellations (DKT for cortical (d=64) and ASEG for subcortical regions (d=66)), and using the higher resolution HCP-MMP1.0 (HCP2016/Glasser) atlas (d=360) to enable dimensionality comparisons. Myelin-related contrast was quantified using the HCP-style T1w/T2w myelin map and means were extracted for these same atlases. Structural IDPs were extracted using Connectome Workbench utilities. 

Resting state fMRI IDPs 

For resting-state fMRI, we focused on measures commonly used for individual-difference and brainвҖ“behavior analyses: functional amplitude and functional connectivity. We extracted both low- and high-dimensional representations to capture complementary scales of functional organization. IDPs were derived from a 25-dimensional group ICA decomposition reflecting canonical resting state networks (Supplementary Fig. S6a) and from the higher-dimensional HCP2016FS atlas (d=379). For the 25-dimensional ICA features, we performed dual regression analysis against the 25 components derived from group-ICA performed in the Human Connectome Project Young Adult dataset. This external template set of components was used to facilitate comparisons in the literature and to avoid challenges with bias that may result from unbalanced samples in the HARMONY cohort including control-case and child-adult ratios. Subject-specific timeseries output from stage 1 of dual regression were used to calculate amplitude and connectivity IDPs as described below. For the HCP2016FS atlas, we included the 360 cortical brain areas defined in the HCP-MMP1.0 

parcellation 74  combined with 19 subcortical brain regions defined in the ASEG atlas to ensure whole-brain 

representation. 

Functional amplitudes were calculated by taking the standard deviation of the extracted timeseries for each IC network and for each HCP2016FS parcel respectively. As such, functional amplitudes reflect the overall 

22 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

strength of signal fluctuations in resting state data indicative of regional synchrony 112 . For amplitude measures, 

this yielded 25 and 379 features, respectively. 

For connectivity, we extracted both full and partial connectivity. Full correlation connectivity was defined as the PearsonвҖҷs correlation between pairwise timeseries of IC networks (300 unique edges) or HCP2016FS parcels (71,631 unique edges) respectively. Partial correlation estimates pairwise connectivity after controlling for the timeseries of all other networks/parcels. Partial (correlation) functional connectivity was calculated by taking the inverse of the covariance matrix and applying L1 regularization. Regularization strength for partial connectivity estimation was optimized to avoid over-regularization and preserve meaningful between-subject variability. Optimization was performed as a grid-search across lambdas ([0.01 0.05 0.1 0.5 1 2 3 4 5 10]), and evaluated based on the correlation between each subjectsвҖҷ partial connectivity matrix at that lambda and the group-averaged partial connectivity matrix (with minimal regularization; О»=0.01). The optimal lambda was chosen as the lowest possible regularization value at which the median (across subjects) for this correlation passed r=0.5. The optimal lambda values scaled with dimensionality (О»=0.01 ICA-25 IDPs; О»=1 for ICA-200 IDPs; О»=0.5 for bilaterally collapsed HCP2016FS IDPs [see below]; О»=2 for HCP2016FS IDPs; Supplementary Fig. S7). Importantly, homologous regions across left and right hemispheres often show very high covariation, which risks removal of too much signal when using partial connectivity. Therefore, for the HCP2016FS parcellation specifically, which has a high degree of left-right homology, we also generated a bilaterally collapsed version of the HCP2016FS parcellation by averaging leftвҖ“right homologous parcels, producing a 199-node representation (yielding 19,701 IDPs for unique edges). Functional connectivity IDPs were computed using FSLNets. Downstream analysis used only the upper triangle of the connectivity matrix (excluding the diagonal) to avoid redundant entries, and applied FisherвҖҷs r-to-z transformation. 

Diffusion IDPs 

For diffusion MRI, while HCP-style acquisitions typically include multiple shells (e.g., b=0, 1500, and 3000 s/mmВІ in the case of the HARMONY cohorts), our primary diffusion IDPs were fractional anisotropy (FA) and 

mean diffusivity (MD) estimated with FSL DTIFIT 113 , which fits a single diffusion tensor under a linear Gaussian 

model assumption 114 . Because this tensor model is most appropriate for lower b-values and can be biased at 

higher b-values, we excluded the b=3000 shell prior to tensor fitting and computed FA/MD using the remaining 

b=1,500 (and b=0) diffusion volumes 115 .

For neurite-related white matter microstructure IDPs, we used a computationally efficient implementation of Neurite Orientation Dispersion and Density Imaging (NODDI) for all multiple shells (b=0, 1500, 3000). 

Specifically, we performed the NODDI-Watson 116  implementation available in the Accelerated Microstructure 

Imaging via Convex Optimization (AMICO) framework 117 . From this, we derived IDP types for neurite density 

index (NDI), orientation dispersion index (ODI) and isotropic volume fraction (IVF). 

For both DTIFIT and NODDI-derived results, IDPs were calculated for the Johns Hopkins University White-Matter Labeled (JHU81) tracts. We additionally generated skeletonized diffusion IDPs using tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) to obtain tract-centered measures. For feature extraction, we first constructed a HARMONY-specific TBSS skeleton from 839 HARMONY participants sampled across all four sites (Supplementary Fig. S6b). Participants with limited diffusion field-of-view coverage (coverage truncated above the middle cerebellar peduncle or above the pontomedullary junction), were excluded from skeleton construction as such scans could compromise accurate estimation of the FA-derived skeleton. The resulting skeleton mask was then applied to all subjects. 

23 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Imaging Derived Phenotype (IDP) harmonization 

To mitigate undesirable site-related effects, we harmonized imaging-derived phenotypes (IDPs) across cohorts 

using ComBat-GAM 63  (fit on controls) and CovBat-GAM 77 , with age and sex included as covariates in all 

models. Age was modeled as a nonlinear smooth term using k=5 for GAM, whereas sex was modeled as an additional categorical covariate. A particular challenge in HARMONY was that symptom severity differed systematically across sites (see Supplementary Fig. S1). Because this variance is biologically relevant and central to downstream analyses, harmonization needed to reduce site effects without removing clinically meaningful between-subject differences that were partially collinear with site. 

Since HAMD was not available in the adolescent cohort (HCP-BANDA), we necessarily needed two different analysis samples, since the associated symptom was included as a covariate during the harmonization modeling to preserve variance related to that symptom. Specifically, prediction of anhedonia (SHAPS) used all four cohorts, while prediction of depression severity (HAMD) necessarily excluded HCP-BANDA. 

We considered two strategies to preserve depression severity effects during harmonization. The first was to include symptom severity as an additional covariate in the harmonization model, alongside age and sex. The second was to estimate harmonization parameters using only healthy controls and then apply these parameters to cases. To prioritize robust implementation and future usability of the HARMONY resource, we 

used established methods available in the  https://github.com/andy1764/ComBatFamily . At the time of analysis, 

the control-trained approach was available for ComBat-GAM but not for CovBat-GAM. Accordingly, ComBat-GAM was fit in controls and then applied to cases, whereas CovBat-GAM was fit using all subjects. We did not include ComBat-GAM trained on all subjects because the primary goal of this contribution was to introduce the HARMONY resource, such that an extensive comparison of harmonization techniques was beyond the scope of this work. The only severity-based covariate available for all four cohorts was SHAPS. Therefore, we used SHAPS as a covariate to preserve psychopathology in CovBat-GAM in addition to age and sex. One limitation of the use of SHAPS for this purpose is that it focuses on anhedonia and does not capture other core symptoms of anxious misery. 

We evaluated harmonization performance using two complementary criteria: i) predictability of site following harmonization and ii) predictability of affective symptoms from IDPs (see below). To assess residual site effects, we performed cross-validated support vector machine (SVM) classification of study sites separately for each IDP file and harmonization approach, including unharmonized, CovBat-GAM, and ComBat-GAM (fit on controls). Cross-validation involved 100 repeats of 5-fold cross-validation, and each repetition was averaged across the 5-folds to promote a more stable output value from each repetition. Age and sex regression was also performed in each cross-validation split through a linear regression in the training data and then applying the training-derived beta weights to the test data. Residuals were used in subsequent analyses. To ensure fair comparison across IDPs with different feature dimensions, each IDP set was reduced using principal component analysis (PCA) to k=25 components, selected to match the lowest-dimensional representation (ICA25). PCA reduction was performed within each cross-validation fold to avoid leakage by fitting the PCA on training data and applying PCA scores to the test data. Classification performance was quantified using balanced accuracy, computed for each separate repetition as the average across each of the 5-folds. Site classification was performed separately in controls and cases across the four cohorts (chance = 25% for balanced accuracy). 

24 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Multivariate brain-anxious misery association mapping 

To assess brainвҖ“behavior prediction, we performed principal component regression (PCR) separately for each IDP file and separately for unharmonized, ComBat-GAM-harmonized, and CovBat-GAM-harmonized IDPs. Separate analyses were performed to predict anhedonia (SHAPS) and depression severity (HAMD). Depression severity predictions only included data from three adult sites due to unavailability of HAMD in HCP-BANDA, while CovBat-GAM predictions used harmonization that leveraged SHAPS as the covariate. Anhedonia predictions included data from all four sites. Cross-validation involved 100 repeated 5-fold shuffle splits same as site prediction. Each IDP set was also reduced to 25 principal components by PCA. Age and sex were regressed out at IDP level and to affective symptoms to correct for age and sex. PCA reduction and age-sex correction were performed within each cross-validation fold to avoid leakage. Model performance was quantified using cross-validated coefficient of determination (R 2) as an effect-size metric. Note that coefficient of determination allows for negative RВІ, which indicates that the model performed worse than simply using the sample mean as the prediction. Statistical significance of each R 2 estimate was calculated by using a corrected 

resampled StudentвҖҷs t-test to account for the dependence among repeated cross-validation estimates 118,119 . For 

100 total (  repeats of 5-fold cross-validation, we compared the R 2 (d i ) against zero as follows: рқ‘ӣ) 

рқ‘‘ = 1рқ‘ӣ рқ‘–=1 рқ‘ӣ 

вҲ‘ рқ‘‘ рқ‘– 

рқ‘Ў = рқ‘‘ Пғрқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘җрқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘‘ 2

Where the corrected variance (  ) is calculated as follows: Пғрқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘җрқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘‘ 2

Пғ2 = 1рқ‘ӣ рқ‘–=1 рқ‘ӣ 

вҲ‘ (рқ‘‘ рқ‘– вҲ’ рқ‘‘ )2

Пғрқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ҹрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘җрқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘‘ 2 = ( 1рқ‘ӣ + рқ‘ӣ рқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ў 

> рқ‘ӣ рқ‘Ўрқ‘ҹрқ‘Һрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ

)Пғ 2

where n = 100 and n test /n train = Вј. Given the relatively Gaussian distribution of R 2, the one-sided p-value was subsequently obtained from the standard t-distribution with nвҲ’1 degrees of freedom: 

рқ‘қ = 1 вҲ’ рқҗ№ рқ‘Ў (рқ‘Ў; рқ‘ӣ вҲ’ 1) 

25 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Univariate brain-anxious misery association mapping 

In addition to multivariate prediction, we performed univariate brainвҖ“behavior association analyses controlled for age and sex to provide interpretable reference results for future users of the HARMONY data resource. We focused on anhedonia, measured by SHAPS, and depression severity, measured by HAMD. Both were separately mapped to three representative IDPs covering structural, functional, and diffusion MRI: corticalвҖ“subcortical volume (HCP2016FS), partial functional connectivity (ICA25), and fractional anisotropy (skeleton JHU81). Univariate analyses were performed using ComBat-GAM-harmonized (fit on controls) IDPs only. 

For each feature within each IDP file, we computed the Pearson correlation with HAMD and SHAPS across subjects after regressing age and sex with complete imaging and symptom data. This yielded feature-wise effect estimates (correlations) across all atlas regions or connectivity edges within each modality. To control for multiple comparisons, Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) correction was applied separately within each IDP across all tested features. Corrected results (q < 0.05) were used to identify significant associations, and the resulting effect estimates were visualized in atlas space to illustrate the spatial distribution of univariate brainвҖ“behavior relationships. These analyses were intended to provide descriptive, interpretable benchmarks alongside the multivariate models. 

26 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Code Availability 

Updated HCP pipeline preprocessing code and information are available here: 

https://github.com/PersonomicsLab/HARMONY/tree/add-harmony-scripts-slurm/scripts/hcp_pipeline .

All other analysis code for this article is publicly available at: 

https://github.com/PersonomicsLab/HARMONY/tree/add-harmony-scripts-slurm/scripts .

# Data Availability 

The HARMONY data resource is available on NDA (link to be added), and on BALSA (link to be added). Raw (unprocessed) data were also shared with the NDA and are available on their website for most cohorts (https://nda.nih.gov/general-query.html?q=query=featured-datasets:Connectomes%20Related%20to%20Huma n%20Disease). 

# Funding Information 

HARMONY is supported by the NIH (NIMH R01 MH132962), and collection of the original dataset was also supported by the NIH (HCP-BANDA: U01MH108168; HCP-DES: U01MH109985; HCP-DAM: U01 MH109991; HCP-PDC: U01 MH110008). Computations were performed using the facilities of the Washington University Research Computing and Informatics Facility (RCIF), which has received funding from NIH S10 program grants: 1S10OD025200-01A1 and 1S10OD030477-01 

27 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# References 

1.  Schmaal, L. et al. Subcortical brain alterations in major depressive disorder: findings from the ENIGMA 

Major Depressive Disorder working group. Mol. Psychiatry 21 , 806вҖ“812 (2016). 

2.  Kaiser, R. H., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., Wager, T. D. & Pizzagalli, D. A. Large-Scale Network Dysfunction in 

Major Depressive Disorder: A Meta-analysis of Resting-State Functional Connectivity. JAMA Psychiatry 

72 , 603вҖ“611 (2015). 

3.  Akiki, T. J., Jubeir, J., Bertrand, C., Tozzi, L. & Williams, L. M. Neural circuit basis of pathological anxiety. 

Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 26 , 5вҖ“22 (2025). 

4.  Zhang, Z. et al. Resting-state network alterations in depression: a comprehensive meta-analysis of 

functional connectivity. Psychol. Med. 55 , e63 (2025). 

5.  Poirot, M. G. et al. Predicting antidepressant treatment response from cortical structure on MRI: A 

mega-analysis from the ENIGMA-MDD working group. Hum. Brain Mapp. 46 , e70053 (2025). 

6.  Sheline, Y. I., Wang, P. W., Gado, M. H., Csernansky, J. G. & Vannier, M. W. Hippocampal atrophy in 

recurrent major depression. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93 , 3908вҖ“3913 (1996). 

7.  Sheline, Y. I. et al. The default mode network and self-referential processes in depression. Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106 , 1942вҖ“1947 (2009). 

8.  Sheline, Y. I. et al. Increased amygdala response to masked emotional faces in depressed subjects 

resolves with antidepressant treatment: an fMRI study. Biol. Psychiatry 50 , 651вҖ“658 (2001). 

9.  Joshi, S. H. et al. Structural plasticity of the hippocampus and amygdala induced by electroconvulsive 

therapy in major depression. Biol. Psychiatry 79 , 282вҖ“292 (2016). 

10.  Vasavada, M. M. et al. Structural connectivity and response to ketamine therapy in major depression: A 

preliminary study. J. Affect. Disord. 190 , 836вҖ“841 (2016). 

11.  Tozzi, L. et al. Personalized brain circuit scores identify clinically distinct biotypes in depression and 

anxiety. Nat. Med. 30 , 2076вҖ“2087 (2024). 

12.  Drysdale, A. T. et al. Resting-state connectivity biomarkers define neurophysiological subtypes of 

depression. Nat. Med. 23 , 28вҖ“38 (2017). 

13.  Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. et al. Association of intrinsic brain architecture with changes in attentional and mood 

28 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

symptoms during development. JAMA Psychiatry 77 , 378вҖ“386 (2020). 

14.  Cao, T. et al. Are neuroanatomical phenotypes for psychiatric disorders robust? An assessment of the 

reproducibility of grey matter differences in mental illness. medRxiv 2025.07.09.25331220 (2025) 

doi: 10.1101/2025.07.09.25331220 .

15.  Hamilton, K. M. et al. The neuroimaging correlates of depression established across six large-scale 

datasets. bioRxivorg 2025.07.02.660888 (2025) doi: 10.1101/2025.07.02.660888 .

16.  Winter, N. R. et al. Quantifying Deviations of Brain Structure and Function in Major Depressive Disorder 

Across Neuroimaging Modalities. JAMA Psychiatry 79 , 879вҖ“888 (2022). 

17.  Williams, L. M. & Whitfield Gabrieli, S. Neuroimaging for precision medicine in psychiatry. 

Neuropsychopharmacology 50 , 246вҖ“257 (2024). 

18.  Bzdok, D. & Meyer-Lindenberg, A. Machine learning for precision psychiatry: Opportunities and 

challenges. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 3, 223вҖ“230 (2018). 

19.  Insel, T. et al. Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework for research on 

mental disorders. Am. J. Psychiatry 167 , 748вҖ“751 (2010). 

20.  Van Essen, D. C. et al. The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: an overview. Neuroimage 80 , 62вҖ“79 

(2013). 

21.  Moeller, S. et al. Multiband multislice GE-EPI at 7 tesla, with 16-fold acceleration using partial parallel 

imaging with application to high spatial and temporal whole-brain fMRI. Magn. Reson. Med. 63 , 1144вҖ“1153 

(2010). 

22.  UДҹurbil, K. et al. Pushing spatial and temporal resolution for functional and diffusion MRI in the Human 

Connectome Project. Neuroimage 80 , 80вҖ“104 (2013). 

23.  Feinberg, D. A. et al. Multiplexed echo planar imaging for sub-second whole brain FMRI and fast diffusion 

imaging. PLoS One 5, e15710 (2010). 

24.  Glasser, M. F. et al. The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the Human Connectome Project. Neuroimage 

80 , 105вҖ“124 (2013). 

25.  Howell, B. R. et al. The UNC/UMN Baby Connectome Project (BCP): An overview of the study design and 

protocol development. Neuroimage 185 , 891вҖ“905 (2019). 

26.  Somerville, L. H. et al. The Lifespan Human Connectome Project in Development: A large-scale study of 

29 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

brain connectivity development in 5-21 year olds. Neuroimage 183 , 456вҖ“468 (2018). 

27.  Bookheimer, S. Y. et al. The Lifespan Human Connectome Project in Aging: An overview. Neuroimage 

185 , 335вҖ“348 (2019). 

28.  Tozzi, L. et al. Convergence, preliminary findings and future directions across the four human connectome 

projects investigating mood and anxiety disorders. Neuroimage 245 , 118694 (2021). 

29.  Hubbard, N. A. et al. The Human Connectome Project of adolescent anxiety and depression dataset. Sci. 

Data 11 , 837 (2024). 

30.  Auerbach, R. P. et al. Reward-related neural circuitry in depressed and anxious adolescents: A human 

connectome project. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 61 , 308вҖ“320 (2022). 

31.  Tozzi, L. et al. The human connectome project for disordered emotional states: Protocol and rationale for a 

research domain criteria study of brain connectivity in young adult anxiety and depression. Neuroimage 

214 , 116715 (2020). 

32.  Seok, D. et al. Dimensional connectomics of anxious misery, a human connectome study related to human 

disease: Overview of protocol and data quality. Neuroimage Clin 28 , 102489 (2020). 

33.  Elam, J. S. et al. The Human Connectome Project: A retrospective. Neuroimage 244 , 118543 (2021). 

34.  Marek, S. et al. Reproducible brain-wide association studies require thousands of individuals. Nature 603 ,

654вҖ“660 (2022). 

35.  Dutt, R. K. et al. Mental health in the UK Biobank: A roadmap to self-report measures and neuroimaging 

correlates. Hum. Brain Mapp. 43 , 816вҖ“832 (2022). 

36.  Spisak, T., Bingel, U. & Wager, T. D. Multivariate BWAS can be replicable with moderate sample sizes. 

Nature 615 , E4вҖ“E7 (2023). 

37.  Sheline, Y. I., Price, J. L., Yan, Z. & Mintun, M. A. Resting-state functional MRI in depression unmasks 

increased connectivity between networks via the dorsal nexus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 ,

11020вҖ“11025 (2010). 

38.  Goldstein-Piekarski, A. N. et al. Mapping neural circuit biotypes to symptoms and behavioral dimensions of 

depression and anxiety. Biol. Psychiatry 91 , 561вҖ“571 (2022). 

39.  Hack, L. M. et al. A stratified precision medicine trial targeting Оұ2A-adrenergic receptor agonism as a 

treatment for the cognitive biotype of depression. Nat. Ment. Health 3, 1363вҖ“1373 (2025). 

30 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40.  Liston, C. et al. Default mode network mechanisms of transcranial magnetic stimulation in depression. 

Biol. Psychiatry 76 , 517вҖ“526 (2014). 

41.  Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. et al. Brain connectomics predict response to treatment in social anxiety disorder. 

Mol. Psychiatry 21 , 680вҖ“685 (2016). 

42.  Wade, B. S. C. et al. Effect of electroconvulsive therapy on striatal morphometry in major depressive 

disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology 41 , 2481вҖ“2491 (2016). 

43.  Jahanshad, N., Lenzini, P. & Bijsterbosch, J. Current best practices and future opportunities for 

reproducible findings using large-scale neuroimaging in psychiatry. Neuropsychopharmacology 1вҖ“15 

(2024) doi: 10.1038/s41386-024-01938-8 .

44.  Fu, C. H. Y. et al. AI-based dimensional neuroimaging system for characterizing heterogeneity in brain 

structure and function in major depressive disorder: COORDINATE-MDD consortium design and rationale. 

BMC Psychiatry 23 , 59 (2023). 

45.  Chopra, S. et al. The Transdiagnostic Connectome Project: an open dataset for studying brain-behavior 

relationships in psychiatry. Sci. Data 12 , 923 (2025). 

46.  Samardzija, A. et al. A transdiagnostic fMRI dataset with 300+ deeply phenotyped subjects across resting 

and task states. medRxiv (2025) doi: 10.1101/2025.07.15.25331595 .

47.  Schmaal, L. et al. ENIGMA MDD: seven years of global neuroimaging studies of major depression through 

worldwide data sharing. Transl. Psychiatry 10 , 172 (2020). 

48.  Ahn, J. et al. Developing clinically interpretable neuroimaging biotypes in psychiatry. Biol. Psychiatry 

(2025) doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2025.08.019 .

49.  Van Essen, D. C. & Barch, D. M. The human connectome in health and psychopathology. World 

Psychiatry 14 , 154вҖ“157 (2015). 

50.  Yu, M. et al. Statistical harmonization corrects site effects in functional connectivity measurements from 

multi-site fMRI data. Hum. Brain Mapp. 39 , 4213вҖ“4227 (2018). 

51.  Fortin, J.-P. et al. Harmonization of cortical thickness measurements across scanners and sites. 

Neuroimage 167 , 104вҖ“120 (2018). 

52.  Gong, W., Beckmann, C. F. & Smith, S. M. Phenotype discovery from population brain imaging. Med. 

Image Anal. 71 , 102050 (2021). 

31 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

53.  Ashburner, J. & Friston, K. J. Voxel-based morphometry--the methods. Neuroimage 11 , 805вҖ“821 (2000). 

54.  Fischl, B. & Dale, A. M. Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic resonance 

images. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97 , 11050вҖ“11055 (2000). 

55.  Glasser, M. F. & Van Essen, D. C. Mapping human cortical areas in vivo based on myelin content as 

revealed by T1- and T2-weighted MRI. J. Neurosci. 31 , 11597вҖ“11616 (2011). 

56.  Garrett, D. D., Kovacevic, N., McIntosh, A. R. & Grady, C. L. Blood oxygen level-dependent signal 

variability is more than just noise. J. Neurosci. 30 , 4914вҖ“4921 (2010). 

57.  Cole, D. M., Smith, S. M. & Beckmann, C. F. Advances and pitfalls in the analysis and interpretation of 

resting-state FMRI data. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 4, 8 (2010). 

58.  Basser, P. J. & Pierpaoli, C. Microstructural and physiological features of tissues elucidated by 

quantitative-diffusion-tensor MRI. J. Magn. Reson. B 111 , 209вҖ“219 (1996). 

59.  Zhang, H., Schneider, T., Wheeler-Kingshott, C. A. & Alexander, D. C. NODDI: practical in vivo neurite 

orientation dispersion and density imaging of the human brain. Neuroimage 61 , 1000вҖ“1016 (2012). 

60.  Hu, F. et al. Image harmonization: A review of statistical and deep learning methods for removing batch 

effects and evaluation metrics for effective harmonization. Neuroimage 274 , 120125 (2023). 

61.  Fortin, J.-P. et al. Harmonization of multi-site diffusion tensor imaging data. Neuroimage 161 , 149вҖ“170 

(2017). 

62.  Chen, A. A. et al. Mitigating site effects in covariance for machine learning in neuroimaging data. Hum. 

Brain Mapp. 43 , 1179вҖ“1195 (2022). 

63.  Pomponio, R. et al. Harmonization of large MRI datasets for the analysis of brain imaging patterns 

throughout the lifespan. Neuroimage 208 , 116450 (2019). 

64.  Ji, J. L. et al. QuNex вҖ“ An Integrative Platform for Reproducible Neuroimaging Analytics. bioRxiv (2022) 

doi: 10.1101/2022.06.03.494750 .

65.  DemЕЎar, J. et al. QuNex recipes: Executable, human-readable workflows for reproducible neuroimaging 

research. bioRxivorg 2025.11.08.687330 (2025) doi: 10.1101/2025.11.08.687330 .

66.  Griffanti, L. et al. ICA-based artefact removal and accelerated fMRI acquisition for improved resting state 

network imaging. Neuroimage 95 , 232вҖ“247 (2014). 

67.  Salimi-Khorshidi, G. et al. Automatic denoising of functional MRI data: combining independent component 

32 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

analysis and hierarchical fusion of classifiers. Neuroimage 90 , 449вҖ“468 (2014). 

68.  Robinson, E. C. et al. MSM: a new flexible framework for Multimodal Surface Matching. Neuroimage 100 ,

414вҖ“426 (2014). 

69.  Robinson, E. C. et al. Multimodal surface matching with higher-order smoothness constraints. Neuroimage 

167 , 453вҖ“465 (2018). 

70.  Yang, C. et al. Automating the human connectome projectвҖҷs temporal ICA pipeline. bioRxivorg 

2024.01.15.574667 (2024) doi: 10.1101/2024.01.15.574667 .

71.  Glasser, M. F. et al. Using temporal ICA to selectively remove global noise while preserving global signal in 

functional MRI data. Neuroimage 181 , 692вҖ“717 (2018). 

72.  Ji, J. L. et al. QuNex-An integrative platform for reproducible neuroimaging analytics. Front. Neuroinform. 

17 , 1104508 (2023). 

73.  Kundu, P. et al. The integration of functional brain activity from adolescence to adulthood. J. Neurosci. 38 ,

3559вҖ“3570 (2018). 

74.  Glasser, M. F. et al. A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature 536 , 171вҖ“178 (2016). 

75.  Desikan, R. S. et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI 

scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage 31 , 968вҖ“980 (2006). 

76.  Miller, K. L. et al. Multimodal population brain imaging in the UK Biobank prospective epidemiological 

study. Nat. Neurosci. 19 , 1523вҖ“1536 (2016). 

77.  Shafiei, G. et al. Reproducible Brain Charts: An open data resource for mapping brain development and its 

associations with mental health. Neuron 113 , 3758вҖ“3779.e6 (2025). 

78.  Xin, Y. et al. ComBat-Predict enhances generalizability of neuroimaging models to new sites. bioRxivorg 

2025.08.21.671401 (2025) doi: 10.1101/2025.08.21.671401 .

79.  Snaith, R. P. et al. A Scale for the Assessment of Hedonic Tone the SnaithвҖ“Hamilton Pleasure Scale. Br. J. 

Psychiatry 167 , 99вҖ“103 (1995). 

80.  Hamilton, M. A rating scale for depression. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 23 , 56вҖ“62 (1960). 

81.  Peverill, M. et al. Balancing data quality and bias: Investigating functional connectivity exclusions in the 

Adolescent Brain cognitive development SM (ABCD study) across quality control pathways. Hum. Brain 

Mapp. 46 , e70094 (2025). 

33 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

82.  Bayer, J. M. M. et al. Site effects how-to and when: An overview of retrospective techniques to 

accommodate site effects in multi-site neuroimaging analyses. Front. Neurol. 13 , 923988 (2022). 

83.  Sampaio, I. W. et al. Comparison of Multi-site Neuroimaging Data Harmonization Techniques for Machine 

Learning Applications. in IEEE EUROCON 2023 - 20th International Conference on Smart Technologies 

307вҖ“312 (IEEE, 2023). doi: 10.1109/EUROCON56442.2023.10198911 .

84.  Marzi, C. et al. Efficacy of MRI data harmonization in the age of machine learning: a multicenter study 

across 36 datasets. Sci Data 11 , 115 (2024). 

85.  Glasser, M. F. et al. The Human Connectome ProjectвҖҷs neuroimaging approach. Nat. Neurosci. 19 ,

1175вҖ“1187 (2016). 

86.  Veitch, D. P. et al. The AlzheimerвҖҷs Disease Neuroimaging Initiative in the era of Alzheimer's disease 

treatment: A review of ADNI studies from 2021 to 2022. Alzheimers. Dement. 20 , 652вҖ“694 (2024). 

87.  Easley, T., Luo, X., Hannon, K., Lenzini, P. & Bijsterbosch, J. Opaque ontology: neuroimaging classification 

of ICD-10 diagnostic groups in the UK Biobank. Gigascience 14 , giae119 (2025). 

88.  Allen, N. E. et al. Prospective study design and data analysis in UK Biobank. Sci. Transl. Med. 16 ,

eadf4428 (2024). 

89.  Thompson, P. M. et al. The Enhancing NeuroImaging Genetics through Meta-analysis Consortium: 10 

years of global collaborations in Human Brain Mapping. Hum. Brain Mapp. 43 , 15вҖ“22 (2022). 

90.  Wu, Y. et al. Genome-wide association study of medication-use and associated disease in the UK 

Biobank. Nat. Commun. 10 , 1891 (2019). 

91.  Smith, S. M. et al. An expanded set of genome-wide association studies of brain imaging phenotypes in 

UK Biobank. Nat. Neurosci. 24 , 737вҖ“745 (2021). 

92.  Rosenblatt, M. et al. Power and reproducibility in the external validation of brain-phenotype predictions. 

Nat. Hum. Behav. 8, 2018вҖ“2033 (2024). 

93.  Ooi, L. Q. R. et al. Longer scans boost prediction and cut costs in brain-wide association studies. Nature 

644 , 731вҖ“740 (2025). 

94.  Nygaard, V., RГёdland, E. A. & Hovig, E. Methods that remove batch effects while retaining group 

differences may lead to exaggerated confidence in downstream analyses. Biostatistics 17 , 29вҖ“39 (2016). 

95.  Sun, D. et al. Comparison of methods: For site harmonization using PTSD as a test case. Biol. Psychiatry 

34 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

93 , S42вҖ“S43 (2023). 

96.  Liu, Z.-Q. et al. Benchmarking methods for mapping functional connectivity in the brain. Nat. Methods 22 ,

1593вҖ“1602 (2025). 

97.  Santucci, F. et al. Partial correlation as a tool for mapping functional-structural correspondence in human 

brain connectivity. Netw. Neurosci. 9, 1065вҖ“1086 (2025). 

98.  Kay, B. P. et al. Motion impact score for detecting spurious brain-behavior associations. Nat. Commun. 16 ,

8614 (2025). 

99.  Makowski, C., Lepage, M. & Evans, A. C. Head motion: the dirty little secret of neuroimaging in psychiatry. 

J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 44 , 62вҖ“68 (2019). 

100.  Makowski, C., Nichols, T. E. & Dale, A. M. Quality over quantity: powering neuroimaging samples in 

psychiatry. Neuropsychopharmacology 50 , 58вҖ“66 (2024). 

101.  Ho, T. C., Shah, R., Mishra, J., May, A. C. & Tapert, S. F. Multi-level predictors of depression symptoms in 

the Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development (ABCD) study. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 63 , 1523вҖ“1533 

(2022). 

102.  Shen, X. et al. Brain structural associations with depression in a large early adolescent sample (the ABCD 

studyВ®). EClinicalMedicine 42 , 101204 (2021). 

103.  Glasser, M. F. et al. Empirical transmit field bias correction of T1w/T2w myelin maps. Neuroimage 258 ,

119360 (2022). 

104.  Glasser, M. F. et al. Classification of temporal ICA components for separating global noise from fMRI data: 

Reply to Power. Neuroimage 197 , 435вҖ“438 (2019). 

105.  Andersson, J. L. R. & Sotiropoulos, S. N. An integrated approach to correction for off-resonance effects 

and subject movement in diffusion MR imaging. Neuroimage 125 , 1063вҖ“1078 (2016). 

106.  Andersson, J. L. R., Graham, M. S., Zsoldos, E. & Sotiropoulos, S. N. Incorporating outlier detection and 

replacement into a non-parametric framework for movement and distortion correction of diffusion MR 

images. Neuroimage 141 , 556вҖ“572 (2016). 

107.  Andersson, J. L. R., Graham, M. S., Drobnjak, I., Zhang, H. & Campbell, J. Susceptibility-induced 

distortion that varies due to motion: Correction in diffusion MR without acquiring additional data. 

Neuroimage 171 , 277вҖ“295 (2018). 

35 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted July 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.26.732748 doi: bioRxiv preprint

108.  Andersson, J. L. R. et al. Towards a comprehensive framework for movement and distortion correction of 

diffusion MR images: Within volume movement. Neuroimage 152 , 450вҖ“466 (2017). 

109.  Bastiani, M. et al. Automated quality control for within and between studies diffusion MRI data using a 

non-parametric framework for movement and distortion correction. Neuroimage 184 , 801вҖ“812 (2019). 

110.  Power, J. D., Barnes, K. A., Snyder, A. Z., Schlaggar, B. L. & Petersen, S. E. Spurious but systematic 

correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion. Neuroimage 59 , 2142вҖ“2154 

(2012). 

111.  Greve, D. N. & Fischl, B. Accurate and robust brain image alignment using boundary-based registration. 

Neuroimage 48 , 63вҖ“72 (2009). 

112.  Lee, S. et al. Amplitudes of resting-state functional networks - investigation into their correlates and 

biophysical properties. Neuroimage 119779 (2022) doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119779 .

113.  Jenkinson, M., Beckmann, C. F., Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W. & Smith, S. M. FSL. Neuroimage 62 ,

782вҖ“790 (2012). 

114.  Jones, D. K. & Cercignani, M. Twenty-five pitfalls in the analysis of diffusion MRI data. NMR Biomed. 23 ,

803вҖ“820 (2010). 

115.  Rosenkrantz, A. B. et al. Body diffusion kurtosis imaging: Basic principles, applications, and considerations 

for clinical practice: Body Diffusion Kurtosis Imaging. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 42 , 1190вҖ“1202 (2015). 

116.  Zhang, H., Hubbard, P. L., Parker, G. J. M. & Alexander, D. C. Axon diameter mapping in the presence of 

orientation dispersion with diffusion MRI. Neuroimage 56 , 1301вҖ“1315 (2011). 

117.  Daducci, A. et al. Accelerated Microstructure Imaging via Convex Optimization (AMICO) from diffusion 

MRI data. Neuroimage 105 , 32вҖ“44 (2015). 

118.  Nadeau, C. & Bengio, Y. Inference for the generalization error. Mach. Learn. 52 , 239вҖ“281 (2003). 

119.  Zeng, T. et al. Widespread use of invalid statistical tests in biomedical machine learning. bioRxiv 

2026.05.17.724301 (2026) doi: 10.64898/2026.05.17.724301 .

36